# To Pope Leo XIII

*Your Holiness:*

I have read with care your Encyclical letter on the
condition of labor, addressed, through the Patriarchs,
Primates, Archbishops and Bishops of your faith, to the
Christian World.

Since its most strikingly pronounced condemnations are
directed against a theory that we who hold it know to be
deserving of your support, I ask permission to lay before
your Holiness the grounds of our belief, and to set forth
some considerations that you have unfortunately overlooked.
The momentous seriousness of the facts you refer to, the
poverty, suffering and seething discontent that pervade the
Christian world, the danger that passion may lead ignorance
in a blind struggle against social conditions rapidly
becoming intolerable, are my justification.

# I

Our postulates are all stated or implied in your Encyclical,
They are the primary perceptions of human reason, the
fundamental teachings of the Christian faith:

We hold: That---

This world is the creation of God.

The men brought into it for the brief period of their
earthly lives are the equal creatures of His bounty, the
equal subjects of His provident care.

By his constitution man is beset by physical wants, on the
satisfaction of which depend not only the maintenance of his
physical life but also the development of his intellectual
and spiritual life.

God has made the satisfaction of these wants dependent on
man's own exertions, giving him the power and laying on him
the injunction to labor---a power that of itself raises him
far above the brute, since we may reverently say that it
enables him to become as it were a helper in the creative
work.

God has not put on man the task of making bricks without
straw. With the need for labor and the power to labor He has
also given to man the material for labor. This material is
land---man physically being a land animal, who can live only
on and from land, and can use other elements, such as air,
sunshine and water, only by the use of land.

Being the equal creatures of the Creator, equally entitled
under His providence to live their lives and satisfy their
needs, men are equally entitled to the use of land, and any
adjustment that denies this equal use of land is morally
wrong.

As to the right of ownership, we hold: That---

Being created individuals, with individual wants and powers,
men are individually entitled (subject of course to the
moral obligations that arise from such relations as that of
the family) to the use of their own powers and the enjoyment
of the results.

There thus arises, anterior to human law, and deriving its
validity from the law of God, a right of private ownership
in things produced by labor---a right that the possessor may
transfer, but of which to deprive him without his will is
theft.

This right of property, originating in the right of the
individual to himself, is the only full and complete right
of property. It attaches to things produced by labor, but
cannot attach to things created by God.

Thus, if a man take a fish from the ocean he acquires a
right of property in that fish, which exclusive right he may
transfer by sale or gift. But he cannot obtain a similar
right of property in the ocean, so that he may sell *it* or
give *it* or forbid others to use *it*.

Or, if he set up a windmill he acquires a right of property
in the things such use of wind enables him to produce. But
he cannot claim a right of property in the wind itself, so
that he may sell *it* or forbid others to use *it*.

Or, if he cultivate grain he acquires a right of property in
the grain his labor brings forth. But he cannot obtain a
similar right of property in the sun which ripened it or the
soil on which it grew. For these things are of the
continuing gifts of God to all generations of men, which all
may use, but none may claim as his alone.

To attach to things created by God the same right of private
ownership that justly attaches to things produced by labor
is to impair and deny the true rights of property. For a man
who out of the proceeds of his labor is obliged to pay
another man for the use of ocean or air or sunshine or soil,
all of which are to men involved in the single term land, is
in this deprived of his rightful property and thus robbed.

As to the use of land, we hold: That---

While the right of ownership that justly attaches to things
produced by labor cannot attach to land, there may attach to
land a right of possession. As your Holiness says, " God has
not granted the earth to mankind in general in the sense
that all without distinction can deal with it as they
please," and regulations necessary for its best use may be
fixed by human laws. But such regulations must conform to
the moral law---must secure to all equal participation in
the advantages of God's general bounty. The principle is the
same as where a human father leaves property equally to a
number of children. Some of the things thus left may be
incapable of common use or of specific division. Such things
may properly be assigned to some of the children, but only
under condition that the equality of benefit among them all
be preserved.

In the rudest social state, while industry consists in
hunting, fishing, and gathering the spontaneous fruits of
the earth, private possession of land is not necessary. But
as men begin to cultivate the ground and expend their labor
in permanent works, private possession of the land on which
labor is thus expended is needed to secure the right of
property in the products of labor. For who would sow if not
assured of the exclusive possession needed to enable him to
reap! who would attach costly works to the soil without such
exclusive possession of the soil as would enable him to
secure the benefit?

This right of private possession in things created by God is
however very different from the right of private ownership
in things produced by labor. The one is limited, the other
unlimited, save in cases when the dictate of
self-preservation terminates all other rights. The purpose
of the one, the exclusive possession of land, is merely to
secure the other, the exclusive ownership of the products of
labor; and it can never rightfully be carried so far as to
impair or deny this. While anyone may hold exclusive
possession of land so far as it does not interfere with the
equal rights of others, he can rightfully hold it no
further.

Thus Cain and Abel, were there only two men on earth, might
by agreement divide the earth between them. Under this
compact each might claim exclusive right to his share as
against the other. But neither could rightfully continue
such claim against the next man born. For since no one comes
into the world without God's permission, his presence
attests his equal right to the use of God's bounty. For them
to refuse him any use of the earth which they had divided
between them would therefore be for them to commit murder.
And for them to refuse him any use of the earth, unless by
laboring for them or by giving them part of the products of
his labor he bought it of them, would be for them to commit
theft.

God's laws do not change. Though their applications may
alter with altering conditions, the same principles of right
and wrong that hold when men are few and industry is rude
also hold amid teeming populations and complex industries.
In our cities of millions and our states of scores of
millions, in a civilization where the division of labor has
gone so far that large numbers are hardly conscious that
they are land users, it still remains true that we are all
land animals and can live only on land, and that land is
God's bounty to all, of which no one can be deprived without
being murdered, and for which no one can be compelled to pay
another without being robbed. But even in a state of society
where, the elaboration of industry and the increase of
permanent improvements have made the need for private
possession of land widespread, there is no difficulty in
conforming individual possession with the equal right to
land. For as soon as any piece of land will yield to the
possessor a larger return than is had by similar labor on
other land a value attaches to it which is shown when it is
sold or rented. Thus, the value of the land itself,
irrespective of the value of any improvements in or on it,
always indicates the precise value of the benefit to which
all are entitled in its use, as distinguished from the value
which as producer or successor of a producer belongs to the
possessor in individual right.

To combine the advantages of private possession with the
justice of common ownership it is only necessary therefore
to take for common uses what value attaches to land
irrespective of any exertion of labor on it. The principle
is the same as in the case referred to, where a human father
leaves equally to his children things not susceptible of
specific division or common use. In that case such things
would be sold or rented and the value equally applied.

It is on this common sense principle that we, who term
ourselves single tax men, would have the community act.

We do not propose to assert equal rights to land by keeping
land common, letting any one use any part of it at any time.
We do not propose the task, impossible in the present state
of society, of dividing land in equal shares; still less the
yet more impossible task of keeping it so divided.

We propose, leaving land in the private possession of
individuals, with full liberty on their part to give, sell
or bequeath it, simply to levy on it for public uses a tax
that shall equal the annual value of the land itself,
irrespective of the use made of it or the improvements on
it. And since this would provide amply for the need of
public revenues, we would accompany this tax on land values
with the repeal of all taxes now levied on the products and
processes of industry---which taxes, since they take from
the earnings of labor, we hold to be infringements of the
right of property.

This we propose, not as a cunning device of human ingenuity,
but as a conforming of human regulations to the will of God.

God cannot contradict himself nor impose on his creatures
laws that clash.

If it be God's command to men that they should not
steal---that is to say, that they should respect the right
of property which each one has in the fruits of his labor;

And if He be also the Father of all men, who in His common
bounty has intended all to have equal opportunities for
sharing;

Then, in any possible stage of civilization, however
elaborate, there must be some way in which the exclusive
right to the products of industry may be reconciled with the
equal right to land.

If the Almighty be consistent with Himself, it cannot be, as
say those socialists referred to by you, that in order to
secure the equal participation of men in the opportunities
of life and labor we must ignore the right of private
property. Nor yet can it be, as you yourself in the
Encyclical seem to argue, that to secure the right of
private property we must ignore the equality of right in the
opportunities of life and labor. To say the one thing or the
other is equally to deny the harmony of God's laws.

But, the private possession of land, subject to the payment
to the community of the value of any special advantage thus
given to the individual, satisfies both laws, securing to
all equal participation in the bounty of the Creator and to
each the full ownership of the products of his labor.

Nor do we hesitate to say that this way of securing the
equal right to the bounty of the Creator and the exclusive
right to the products of labor is the way intended by God
for raising public revenues. For we are not atheists, who
deny God; nor semi-atheists, who deny that He has any
concern in politics and legislation.

It is true as you say---a salutary truth too often
forgotten---that "man is older than the state, and he holds
the right of providing for the life of his body prior to the
formation of any state." Yet, as you too perceive, it is
also true that the state is in the divinely appointed order.
For He who foresaw all things and provided for all things,
foresaw and provided that with the increase of population
and the development of industry the organization of human
society into states or governments would become both
expedient and necessary.

No sooner does the state arise than, as we all know, it
needs revenues. This need for revenues is small at first,
while population is sparse, industry rude and the functions
of the state few and simple. But with growth of population
and advance of civilization the functions of the state
increase and larger and larger revenues are needed.

Now, He that made the world and placed man in it, He that
preordained civilization as the means whereby man might rise
to higher powers and become more and more conscious of the
works of his Creator, must have foreseen this increasing
need for state revenues and have made provision for it. That
is to say: The increasing need for public revenues with
social advance, being a natural, God-ordained need, there
must be a right way of raising them---some way that we can
truly say is the way intended by God. It is clear that this
right way of raising public revenues must accord with the
moral law.

Hence:

It must not take from individuals what rightfully belongs to
individuals.

It must not give some an advantage over others, as by
increasing the prices of what some have to sell and others
must buy.

It must not lead men into temptation, by requiring trivial
oaths, by making it profitable to lie, to swear falsely, to
bribe or to take bribes.

It must not confuse the distinctions of right and wrong, and
weaken the sanctions of religion and the state by creating
crimes that are not sins, and punishing men for doing what
in itself they have an undoubted right to do.

It must not repress industry. It must not check commerce. It
must not punish thrift. It must offer no impediment to the
largest production and the fairest division of wealth.

Let me ask your Holiness to consider the taxes on the
processes and products of industry by which through the
civilized world public revenues are collected---the octroi
duties that surround Italian cities with barriers; the
monstrous customs duties that hamper intercourse between
so-called Christian states; the taxes on occupations, on
earnings, on investments, on the building of houses, on the
cultivation of fields, on industry and thrift in all forms.
Can these be the ways God has intended that governments
should raise the means they need? Have any of them the
characteristics indispensable in any plan we can deem a
right one?

All these taxes violate the moral law. They take by force
what belongs to the individual alone; they give to the
unscrupulous an advantage over the scrupulous; they have the
effect, nay are largely intended, to increase the price of
what some have to sell and others must buy; they corrupt
government; they make oaths a mockery; they shackle
commerce; they fine industry and thrift; they lessen the
wealth that men might enjoy, and enrich some by
impoverishing others.

Yet what most strikingly shows how opposed to Christianity
is this system of raising public revenues is its influence
on thought.

Christianity teaches us that all men are brethren; that
their true interests are harmonious, not antagonistic. It
gives us, as the golden rule of life, that we should do to
others as we would have others do to us. But out of the
system of taxing the products and processes of labor, and
out of its effects in increasing the price of what some have
to sell and others must buy, has grown the theory of
"protection," which denies this gospel, which holds Christ
ignorant of political economy and proclaims laws of national
well-being utterly at variance with His teaching. This
theory sanctifies national hatreds; it inculcates a
universal war of hostile tariffs; it teaches peoples that
their prosperity lies in imposing on the productions of
other peoples restrictions they do not wish imposed on their
own; and instead of the Christian doctrine of man's
brotherhood it makes injury of foreigners a civic virtue.

"By their fruits you shall know them." Can anything more
clearly show that to tax the products and processes of
industry is not the way God intended public revenues to be
raised?

But to consider what we propose---the raising of public
revenues by a single tax on the value of land irrespective
of improvements---is to see that in all respects this does
conform to the moral law.

Let me ask your Holiness to keep in mind that the value we
propose to tax, the value of land irrespective of
improvements, does not come from any exertion of labor or
investment of capital on or in it---the values produced in
this way being values of improvement which we would exempt.
The value of land irrespective of improvement is the value
that attaches to land by reason of increasing population and
social progress. This is a value that always goes to the
owner as owner, and never does and never can go to the user;
for if the user be a different person from the owner he must
always pay the owner for it in rent or in purchase money;
while if the user be also the owner, it is as owner,, not as
user, that he receives it, and by selling or renting the
land he can, as owner, continue to receive it after he
ceases to be a user.

Thus, taxes on land irrespective of improvement cannot
lessen the rewards of industry, nor add to prices,nor in any
way take from the individual what belongs to the individual.
They can only take the value that attaches to land by the
growth of the community, and which therefore belongs to the
community as a whole.

To take land values for the state, abolishing all taxes on
the products of labor, would therefore leave to the laborer
the full produce of labor; to the individual all that
rightfully belongs to the individual. It would impose no
burden on industry, no check on commerce, no punishment on
thrift; it would secure the largest production and the
fairest distribution of wealth, by leaving men free to
produce and to exchange as they please, without any
artificial enhancement of prices; and by taking for public
purposes a value that cannot be carried off, that cannot be
hidden, that of all values is most easily ascertained and
most certainly and cheaply collected, it would enormously
lessen the number of officials, dispense with oaths, do away
with temptations to bribery and evasion, and abolish
man-made crimes in themselves innocent.

But, further: That God has intended the state to obtain the
revenues it needs by the taxation of land values is shown by
the same order and degree of evidence that shows that God
has intended the milk of the mother for the nourishment of
the babe.

See how close is the analogy. In that primitive condition
ere the need for the state arises there are no land values.
The products of labor have value, but in the sparsity of
population no value as yet attaches to land itself. But as
increasing density of population and increasing elaboration
of industry necessitate the organization of the state, with
its need for revenues, value begins to attach to land. As
population still increases and industry grows more
elaborate, so the needs for public revenues increase. And at
the same time and from the same causes land values increase.
The connection is invariable. The value of things produced
by labor tends to decline with social development, since the
larger scale of production and the improvement of processes
tend steadily to reduce their cost. But the value of land on
which population centers goes up and up. Take Rome or Paris
or London or New York or Melbourne. Consider the enormous
value of land in such cities as compared with the value of
land in sparsely settled parts of the same countries. To
what is this due? Is it not due to the density and activity
of the populations of those cities---to the very causes that
require great public expenditure for streets, drains, public
buildings, and all the many things needed for the health,
convenience and safety of such great cities? See how with
the growth of such cities the one thing that steadily
increases in value is land; how the opening of roads, the
building of railways, the making of any public improvement,
adds to the value of land. Is it not clear that here is a
natural law---that is to say a tendency willed by the
Creator? Can it mean anything else than that He who ordained
the state with its needs has in the values which attach to
land provided the means to meet those needs?

That it does mean this and nothing else is confirmed if we
look deeper still, and inquire not merely as to the intent,
but as to the purpose of the intent. If we do so we may see
in this natural law by which land values increase with the
growth of society not only such a perfectly adapted
provision for the needs of society as gratifies our
intellectual perceptions by showing us the wisdom of the
Creator, but a purpose with regard to the individual that
gratifies our moral perceptions by opening to us a glimpse
of His beneficence.

Consider: Here is a natural law by which as society advances
the one thing that increases m value is land---a natural law
by virtue of which all growth of population, all advance of
the arts, all general improvements of whatever kind, add to
a fund that both the commands of justice and the dictates of
expediency prompt us to take for the common uses of society.
Now, since increase in the fund available for the common
uses of society is increase in the gain that goes equally to
each member of society, is it not clear that the law by
which land values increase with social advance while the
value of the products of labor do not increase, tends with
the advance of civilization to make the share that goes
equally to each member of society more and more important as
compared with what goes to him from his individual earnings,
and thus to make the advance of civilization lessen
relatively the differences that in a ruder social state must
exist between the strong and the weak, the fortunate and the
unfortunate? Does it not show the purpose of the Creator to
be that the advance of man in civilization should be an
advance not merely to larger powers but to a greater and
greater equality, instead of what we, by our ignoring of His
intent, are making it, an advance towards a more and more
monstrous inequality?

That the value attaching to land with social growth is
intended for social needs is shown by the final proof. God
is indeed a jealous God in the sense that nothing but injury
and disaster can attend the effort of men to do things other
than in the way He has intended; in the sense that where the
blessings He proffers to men are refused or misused they
turn to evils that scourge us. And just as for the mother to
withhold the provision that fills her breast with the birth
of the child is to endanger physical health, so for society
to refuse to take for social uses the provision intended for
them is to breed social disease.

For refusal to take for public purposes the increasing
values that attach to land with social growth is to
necessitate the getting of public revenues by taxes that
lessen production, distort distribution and corrupt society.
It is to leave some to take what justly belongs to all; it
is to forego the only means by which it is possible in an
advanced civilization to combine the security of possession
that is necessary to improvement with the equality of
natural opportunity that is the most important of all
natural rights. It is thus at the basis of all social life
to set up an unjust inequality between man and man,
compelling some to pay others for the privilege of living,
for the chance of working, for the advantages of
civilization, for the gifts of their God. But it is even
more than this. The very robbery that the masses of men thus
suffer gives rise in advancing communities to a new robbery.
For the value that with the increase of population and
social advance attaches to land being suffered to go to
individuals who have secured ownership of the land, it
prompts to a forestalling of and speculation in land
wherever there is any prospect of advancing population or of
coming improvement, thus producing an artificial scarcity of
the natural elements of life and labor, and a strangulation
of production that shows itself in recurring spasms of
industrial depression as disastrous to the world as
destructive wars. It is this that is driving men from the
old countries to the new countries, only to bring there the
same curses. It is this that causes our material advance not
merely to fail to improve the condition of the mere worker,
but to make the condition of large classes positively worse.
It is this that in our richest Christian countries is giving
us a large population whose lives are harder, more hopeless,
more degraded than those of the veriest savages. It is this
that leads so many men to think that God is a bungler and is
constantly bringing more people into His world than He has
made provision for; or that there is no God, and that belief
in Him is a superstition which the facts of life and the
advance of science are dispelling.

The darkness in light, the weakness in strength, the poverty
amid wealth, the seething discontent foreboding civil
strife, that characterize our civilization of to-day, are
the natural, the inevitable results of our rejection of
God's beneficence, of our ignoring of His intent. Were we on
the other hand to follow His clear, simple rule of right,
leaving scrupulously to the individual all that individual
labor produces, and taking for the community the value that
attaches to land by the growth of the community itself, not
merely could evil modes of raising public revenue be
dispensed with, but all men would be placed on an equal
level of opportunity with regard to the bounty of their
Creator, on an equal level of opportunity to exert their
labor and to enjoy its fruits. And then, without drastic or
restrictive measures the forestalling of land would cease.
For then the possession of land would mean only security for
the permanence of its use, and there would be no object for
any one to get land or to keep land except for use; nor
would his possession of better land than others had confer
any unjust advantage on him, or unjust deprivation on them,
since the equivalent of the advantage would be taken by the
state for the benefit of all.

The Right Reverend Dr. Thomas Nulty, Bishop of Meath, who
sees all this as clearly as we do, in pointing out to the
clergy and laity of his diocesethe design of Divine
Providence that the rent of land should be taken for the
community, says:

"I think, therefore, that I may fairly infer, on the
strength of authority as well as of reason, that the people
are and always must be the real owners of the land of their
country. This great social fact appears to me to be of
incalculable importance, and it is fortunate, indeed, that
on the strictest principles of justice it is not clouded
even by a shadow of uncertainty or doubt. There is,
moreover, a charm and a peculiar beauty in the clearness
with which it reveals the wisdom and the benevolence of the
designs of Providence in the admirable provision He has made
for the wants and the necessities of that state of social
existence of which He is author, and in which the very
instincts of nature tell us we are to spend our lives. A
vast public property, a great national fund, has been placed
under the dominion and at the disposal of the nation to
supply itself abundantly with resources necessary to
liquidate the expenses of its government, the administration
of its laws and the education of its youth, and to enable it
to provide for the suitable sustentation and support of its
criminal and pauper population. One of the most interesting
peculiarities of this property is that its value is never
stationary; it is constantly progressive and increasing in a
direct ratio to the growth of the population, and the very
causes that increase and multiply the demands made on it
increase proportionately its ability to meet them."

There is, indeed, as Bishop Nulty says, a peculiar beauty in
the clearness with which the wisdom and benevolence of
Providence are revealed in this great social fact, the
provision made for the common needs of society in what
economists call the law of rent. Of all the evidence that
natural religion gives, it is this that most clearly shows
the existence of a beneficent God, and most conclusively
silences the doubts that in our days lead so many to
materialism.

For in this beautiful provision made by natural law for the
social needs of civilization we see that God has intended
civilization; that all our discoveries and inventions do not
and cannot outrun His forethought, and that steam,
electricity and labor saving appliances only make the great
moral laws clearer and more important. In the growth of this
great fund, increasing with social advance---a fund that
accrues from the growth of the community and belongs
therefore to the community---we see not only that there is
no need for the taxes that lessen wealth, that engender
corruption, that promote inequality and teach men to deny
the gospel; but that to take this fund for the purpose for
which it was evidently intended would in the highest
civilization secure to all the equal enjoyment of God's
bounty, the abundant opportunity to satisfy their wants, and
would provide amply for every legitimate need of the state.
We see that God in His dealings with men has not been a
bungler or a niggard; that He has not brought too many men
into the world; that He has not neglected abundantly to
supply them; that He has not intended that bitter
competition of the masses for a mere animal existence and
that monstrous aggregation of wealth which characterize our
civilization; but that these evils which lead so many to say
there is no God, or yet more impiously to say that they are
of God's ordering, are due to our denial of His moral law.
We see that the law of justice, the law of the Golden Rule,
is not a mere counsel of perfection, but indeed the law of
social life. We see that if we were only to observe it there
would be work for all, leisure for all, abundance for all;
and that civilization would tend to give to the poorest not
only necessaries, but all comforts and reasonable luxuries
as well. We see that Christ was not a mere dreamer when He
told men that if they would seek the kingdom of God and its
right doing they might no more worry about material things
than do the lilies of the field about their raiment; but
that He was only declaring what political economy in the
light of modern discovery shows to be a sober truth.

Your Holiness, even to see this is deep and lasting joy. For
it is to see for one's self that there is a God who lives
and reigns, and that He is a God of justice and love---Our
Father who art in Heaven. It is to open a rift of sunlight
through the clouds of our darker questionings, and to make
the faith that trusts where it cannot see a living thing.

# II

Your Holiness will see from the explanation I have given
that the reform we propose, like all true reforms, has both
an ethical and an economic side. By ignoring the ethical
side, and pushing our proposal merely as a reform of
taxation, we could avoid the objections that arise from
confounding ownership with possession and attributing to
private property in land that security of use and
improvement that can be had even better without it. All that
we seek practically is the legal abolition, as fast as
possible, of taxes on the products and processes of labor,
and the consequent concentration of taxation on land values
irrespective of improvements. To put our proposals in this
way would be to urge them merely as a matter of wise public
expediency.

There are indeed many single tax men who do put our
proposals in this way; who seeing the beauty of our plan
from a fiscal standpoint do not concern themselves farther.
But to those who think as I do, the ethical is the more
important side. Not only do we not wish to evade the
question of private property in land, but to us it seems
that the beneficent and far-reaching revolution we aim at is
too great a thing to be accomplished by "intelligent
self-interest," and can be carried by nothing less than the
religious conscience.

Hence we earnestly seek the judgment of religion. This is
the tribunal of which your Holiness as the head of the
largest body of Christians is the most august
representative.

It therefore behooves us to examine the reasons you urge in
support of private property inland---if they be sound to
accept them, and if they be not sound respectfully to point
out to you wherein is their error.

To your proposition that "Our first and most fundamental
principle when we undertake to alleviate the condition of
the masses must be the inviolability of private property" we
would joyfully agree if we could only understand you to have
in mind the moral element, and to mean rightful private
property, as when you speak of marriage as ordained by God's
authority we may understand an implied exclusion of improper
marriages. Unfortunately, however, other expressions show
that you mean private property in general and have expressly
in mind private property in land. This confusion of thought,
this non-distribution of terms, runs through your whole
argument, leading you to conclusions so unwarranted by your
premises as to be utterly repugnant to them, as when from
the moral sanction of private property in the things
produced by labor you infer something entirely different and
utterly opposed, a similar right of property in the land
created by God.

Private property is not of one species, and moral sanction
can no more be asserted universally of it than of marriage.
That proper marriage conforms to the law of God does not
justify the polygamic, or polyandric or incestuous marriages
that are in some countries permitted by the civil law. And
as there may be immoral marriage so may there may be immoral
private property. Private property is that which may be held
in ownership by an individual, or that which may be held in
ownership by an individual with the sanction of the state.
The mere lawyer, the mere servant of the state, may rest
here, refusing to distinguish between what the state holds
equally lawful. Your Holiness, however, is not a servant of
the state, but a servant of God, a guardian of morals. You
know, as said by St. Thomas Aquinas, that---

"Human law is law only in virtue of its accordance with
right reason and it is thus manifest that it flows from the
eternal law. And in so far as it deviates from right reason
it is called an unjust law. *In such case it is not law at
all, but rather a species of violence.*"

Thus, that any species of property is permitted by the state
does not of itself give it moral sanction. The state has
often made things property that are not justly property, but
involve violence and robbery.

For instance, the things of religion, the dignity and
authority of offices of the church, the power of
administering her sacraments and controlling her
temporalities have often by profligate princes been given as
salable property to courtiers and concubines. At this very
day in England an atheist or a heathen may buy in open
market, and hold as legal property, to be sold, given or
bequeathed as he pleases, the power of appointing to the
cure of souls, and the value of these legal rights of
presentation is said to be no less than £17,000,000.

Or again: Slaves were universally treated as property by the
customs and laws of the classical nations, and were so
acknowledged in Europe long after the acceptance of
Christianity. At the beginning of this century there was no
Christian nation that did not, in her colonies at least,
recognize property in slaves, and slave ships crossed the
seas under Christian flags. In the United States, little
more than thirty years ago, to buy a man gave the same legal
ownership as to buy a horse, and in Mohammedan countries law
and custom yet make the slave the property of his captor or
purchaser.

Yet your Holiness, one of the glories of whose pontificate
is the attempt to break up slavery in its last strongholds,
will not contend that the moral sanction that attaches to
property in things produced by labor can, or ever could,
apply to property in slaves.

Your use, in so many passages of your Encyclical, of the
inclusive term "property" or "private" property, of which in
morals nothing can be either affirmed or denied, makes your
meaning, if we take isolated sentences, in many places
ambiguous. But reading it as a whole, there can be no doubt
of your intention that private property in land shall be
understood when you speak merely of private property. With
this interpretation, I find that the reasons you urge for
private property in land are eight. Let us consider them in
order of presentation. You urge:

1\. *That what is bought with rightful property is rightful
property. (6.)*

Clearly, purchase and sale cannot give, but can only
transfer ownership. Property that in itself has no moral
sanction does not obtain moral sanction by passing from
seller to buyer.

If right reason does not make the slave the property of the
slave hunter it does not make him the property of the slave
buyer. Yet your reasoning as to private property in land
would as well justify property in slaves. To show this it is
only needful to change in your argument the word land to the
word slave. It would then read:

"It is surely undeniable that when a man engages in
remunerative labor the very reason and motive of his work is
to obtain property, and to hold it in his own private
possession.

"If one man hire out to another his strength or his industry
he does this for the purpose of receiving in return what is
necessary for food and living; he thereby expressly proposes
to acquire a full and legal right, not only to the
remuneration, but also to the disposal of that remuneration
as he pleases.

"Thus, if he lives sparingly, saves money and invests his
savings for greater security in a *slave*, the *slave* in
such a case is only his wages in another form; and
consequently a working-man's *slave* thus purchased should
be as completely at his own disposal as the wages he
receives for his labor."

Nor in turning your argument for private property in land
into an argument for private property in men am I doing a
new thing. In my own country, in my own time, this very
argument, that purchase gave ownership, was the common
defense of slavery. It was made by statesmen, by jurists, by
clergymen, by bishops; it was accepted over the whole
country by the great mass of the people. By it was justified
the separation of wives from husbands, of children from
parents, the compelling of labor, the appropriation of its
fruits, the buying and selling of Christians by Christians.
In language almost identical with yours it was asked, "Here
is a poor man who has worked hard, lived sparingly, and
invested his savings in a few slaves. Would you rob him of
his earnings by liberating those slaves" Or it was said:
"Here is a poor widow; all her husband has been able to
leave her is a few negroes, the earnings of his hard toil.
Would you rob the widow and the orphan by freeing these
negroes?" And because of this perversion of reason, this
confounding of unjust property rights with just property
rights, this acceptance of man's law as though it were God's
law, there came on our nation a judgment of fire and blood.

The error of our people in thinking that what in itself was
not rightfully property could become rightful property by
purchase and sale is the same error into which your Holiness
falls. It is not merely formally the same; it is essentially
the same. Private property in land, no less than private
property in slaves, is a violation of the true rights of
property. They are different forms of the same robbery; twin
devices by which the perverted ingenuity of man has sought
to enable the strong and the cunning to escape God's
requirement of labor by forcing it on others.

What difference does it make whether I merely own the land
on which another man must live or own the man himself % Am I
not in the one case as much his master as in the other? Can
I not compel him to work for me? Can I not take to myself as
much of the fruits of his labor; as fully dictate his
actions % Have I not over him the power of life and death?
For to deprive a man of land is as certainly to kill him as
to deprive him of blood by opening his veins, or of air by
tightening a halter around his neck.

The essence of slavery is in empowering one man to obtain
the labor of another without recompense. Private property in
land does this as fully as chattel slavery. The slave owner
must leave to the slave enough of his earnings to enable him
to live. Are there not in so called free countries great
bodies of working-men who get no more? How much more of the
fruits of their toil do the agricultural laborers of Italy
and England get than did the slaves of our Southern States?
Did not private property in land permit the land owner of
Europe in ruder times to demand the *jus primoe noctis?*
Does not the same last outrage exist to-day in diffused form
in the immorality born of monstrous wealth on the one hand
and ghastly poverty on the other?

In what did the slavery of Russia consist but in giving to
the master land on which the serf was forced to live? When
an Ivan or a Catherine enriched their favorites with the
labor of others they did not give men, they gave land. And
when the appropriation of land has gone so far that no free
land remains to which the landless man may turn, then
without further violence the more insidious form of labor
robbery involved in private property in land takes the place
of chattel slavery, because more economical and convenient.
For under it the slave does not have to be caught or held,
or to be fed when not needed. He comes of himself, begging
the privilege of serving, and when no longer wanted can be
discharged. The lash is unnecessary; hunger is as
efficacious. This is why the Norman conquerors of England
and the English conquerors of Ireland did not divide up the
people, but divided the land. This is why European slave
ships took their cargoes to the New World, not to Europe.

Slavery is not yet abolished. Though in all Christian
countries its ruder form has now gone, it still exists in
the heart of our civilization in more insidious form, and is
increasing. There is work to be done for the glory of God
and the liberty of man by other soldiers of the cross than
those warrior monks whom, with the blessing of your
Holiness, Cardinal Lavigerie is sending into the Sahara.
Yet, your Encyclical employs in defense of one form of
slavery the same fallacies that the apologists for chattel
slavery used in defense of the other!

The Arabs are not wanting in acumen. Your Encyclical reaches
far. What shall your warrior monks say, if when at the
muzzle of their rifles they demand of some Arab slave
merchant his miserable caravan, he shall declare that he
bought them with his savings, and producing a copy of your
Encyclical, shall prove by your reasoning that his slaves
are consequently "only his wages in another form," and ask
if they who bear your blessing and own your authority
propose to "deprive him of the liberty of disposing of his
wages and thus of all hope and possibility of increasing his
stock and bettering his condition in life?"

2\. *That private property in land proceeds from man's gift
of reason. (6-7.)*

In the second place your Holiness argues that man possessing
reason and forethought may not only acquire ownership of the
fruits of the earth, but also of the earth itself, so that
out of its products he may make provision for the future.

Reason, with its attendant forethought, is indeed the
distinguishing attribute of man; that which raises him above
the brute, and shows, as the Scriptures declare, that he is
created in the likeness of God. And this gift of reason
does, as your Holiness points out, involve the need and
right of private property in whatever is produced by the
exertion of reason and its attendant forethought, as well as
in what is produced by physical labor. In truth, these
elements of man's production are inseparable, and labor
involves the use of reason. It is by his reason that man
differs from the animals in being a producer, and in this
sense a maker. Of themselves his physical powers are slight,
forming as it were but the connection by which the mind
takes hold of material things, so as to utilize to its will
the matter and forces of nature. It is mind, the intelligent
reason, that is the prime mover in labor, the essential
agent in production.

The right of private ownership does therefore indisputably
attach to things provided by man's reason and forethought.
But it cannot attach to things provided by the reason and
forethought of God!

To illustrate: Let us suppose a company travelling through
the desert as the Israelites travelled from Egypt. Such of
them as had the forethought to provide themselves with
vessels of water would acquire a just right of property in
the water so carried, and in the thirst of the waterless
desert those who had neglected to provide themselves, though
they might ask water from the provident in charity, could
not demand it in right. For while water itself is of the
providence of God, the presence of this water in such
vessels, at such place, results from the providence of the
men who carried it. Thus they have to it an exclusive right.

But suppose others use their forethought in pushing ahead
and appropriating the springs, refusing when their fellows
come up to let them drink of the water save as they buy it
of them. Would such forethought give any right?

Your Holiness, it is not the forethought of carrying water
where it is needed, but the forethought of seizing springs,
that you seek to defend in defending the private ownership
of land!

Let me show this more fully, since it may be worth while to
meet those who say that if private property in land be not
just, then private property in the products of labor is not
just, as the material of these products is taken from land.
It will be seen on consideration that all of man's
production is analogous to such transportation of water as
we have supposed. In growing grain, or smelting metals, or
building houses, or weaving cloth, or doing any of the
things that constitute producing, all that man does is to
change in place or form pre-existing matter. As a producer
man is merely a changer, not a creator; God alone creates.
And since the changes in which man's production consists
inhere in matter so long as they persist, the right of
private ownership attaches the accident to the essence, and
gives the right of ownership in that natural material in
which the labor of production is embodied. Thus water, which
in its original form and place is the common gift of God to
all men, when drawn from its natural reservoir and brought
into the desert, passes rightfully into the ownership of the
individual who by changing its place has produced it there.

But such right of ownership is in reality a mere right of
temporary possession. For though man may take material from
the storehouse of nature and change it in place or form to
suit his desires, yet from the moment he takes it, it tends
back to that storehouse again. Wood decays, iron rusts,
stone disintegrates and is displaced, while of more
perishable products, some will last for only a few months,
others for only a few days, and some disappear immediately
on use. Though, so far as we can see, matter is eternal and
force forever persists; though we can neither annihilate nor
create the tiniest mote that floats in a sunbeam or the
faintest impulse that stirs a leaf, yet in the ceaseless
flux of nature, man's work of moving and combining
constantly passes away. Thus the recognition of the
ownership of what natural material is embodied in the
products of man never constitutes more than temporary
possession---never interferes with the reservoir provided
for all. As taking water from one place and carrying it to
another place by no means lessens the store of water, since
whether it is drunk or spilled or left to evaporate, it must
return again to the natural reservoirs---so is it with all
things on which man in production can lay the impress of his
labor.

Hence, when you say that man's reason puts it within his
right to have in stable and permanent possession not only
things that perish in the using, but also those that remain
for use in the future, you are right in so far as you may
include such things as buildings, which with repair will
last for generations, with such things as food or firewood,
which are destroyed in the use. But when you infer that man
can have private ownership in those permanent things of
nature that are the reservoirs from which all must draw, you
are clearly wrong. Man may indeed hold in private ownership
the fruits of the earth produced by his labor, since they
lose in time the impress of that labor, and pass again into
the natural reservoirs from which they were taken, and thus
the ownership of them by one works no injury to others. But
he cannot so own the earth itself, for that is the reservoir
from which must constantly be drawn not only the material
with which alone men can produce, but even their very
bodies.

The conclusive reason why man cannot claim ownership in the
earth itself as he can in the fruits that he by labor brings
forth from it, is in the facts stated by you in the very
next paragraph (7), when you truly say:

"Man's needs do not die out, but recur; satisfied to-day
they demand new supplies to-morrow."*Nature therefore owes
to man a storehouse that shall never fail, the daily supply
of his daily wants. And this he finds only in the
inexhaustible fertility of the earth.*"

By man you mean all men. Can what nature owes to all men be
made the private property of some men, from which they may
debar all other men?

Let me dwell on the words of your Holiness, "*Nature*,
therefore, *owes* to man a storehouse that shall never
fail." By Nature you mean God. Thus your thought, that in
creating us, God himself has incurred an obligation to
provide us with a storehouse that shall never fail, is the
same as is thus expressed and carried to its irresistible
conclusion by the Bishop of Meath:

"God was perfectly free in the act by which He created us;
but having created us He bound himself by that act to
provide us with the means necessary for our subsistence. The
land is the only source of this kind now known to us. The
land, therefore, of every country is the common property of
the people of that country, because its real owner, the
Creator who made it, has transferred it as a voluntary gift
to them. '*Terram autem dedit filiis hominum.*' Now, as
every individual in that country is a creature and child of
God, and as all His creatures are equal in His sight, any
settlement of the land of a country that would exclude the
humblest man in that country from his share of the common
inheritance would be not only an injustice and a wrong to
that man, but, moreover, be **an impious resistance to the
benevolent interventions of his creator**."

3\. *That private property in land deprives no one of the
use of land. (8.)*

Your own statement that land is the inexhaustible storehouse
that God owes to man must have aroused in your Holiness's
mind an uneasy questioning of its appropriation as private
property, for, as though to reassure yourself, you proceed
to argue that its ownership by some will not injure others.
You say in substance, that even though divided among private
owners the earth does not cease to minister to the needs of
all, since those who do not possess the soil can by selling
their labor obtain in payment the produce of the land.

Suppose that to your Holiness as a judge of morals one
should put this case of conscience:

"I am one of several children to whom our father left a
field abundant for our support. As he assigned no part of it
to any one of us in particular, leaving the limits of our
separate possession to be fixed by ourselves, I being the
eldest took the whole field in exclusive ownership. But in
doing so I have not deprived my brothers of their support
from it, for I have let them work for me on it, paying them
from the produce as much wages as I would have had to pay
strangers. Is there any reason why my conscience should not
be clear?"

What would be your answer? Would you not tell him that he
was in mortal sin, and that his excuse added to his guilt?
Would you not call on him to make restitution and to do
penance?

Or, suppose that as a temporal prince your Holiness were
ruler of a rainless land, such as Egypt, where there were no
springs or brooks, their want being supplied by a bountiful
river like the Nile. Supposing that having sent a number of
your subjects to make fruitful this land, bidding them do
justly and prosper, you were told that some of them had set
up a claim of ownership in the river, refusing the others a
drop of water, except as they bought it of them; and that
thus they had become rich without work, while the others,
though working hard, were so impoverished by paying for
water as to be hardly able to exist?

Would not your indignation wax hot when this was told?

Suppose that then the river owners should send to you and
thus excuse their action:

"The river, though divided among private owners ceases not
thereby to minister to the needs of all, for there is no one
who drinks who does not drink of the water of the river.
Those who do not possess the water of the river contribute
their labor to get it; so that it may be truly said that all
water is supplied either from one's own river, or from some
laborious industry which is paid for either in the water, or
in that which is exchanged for the water."

Would the indignation of your Holiness be abated? Would it
not wax fiercer yet for the insult to your intelligence of
this excuse?

I do not need more formally to show your Holiness that
between utterly depriving a man of God's gifts and depriving
him of God's gifts unless he will buy them, is merely the
difference between the robber who leaves his victim to die
and the robber who puts him to ransom. But I would like to
point out how your statement that "the earth though divided
among private owners ceases not thereby to minister to the
needs of all" overlooks the largest facts.

From your palace of the Vatican the eye may rest on the
expanse of the Campagna, where the pious toil of religious
congregations and the efforts of the state are only now
beginning to make it possible for men to live. Once that
expanse was tilled by thriving husband-men and dotted with
smiling hamlets. What for centuries has condemned it to
desertion? History tells us. It was private property in
land; the growth of the great estates of which Pliny saw
that ancient Italy was perishing; the cause that, by
bringing failure to the crop of men, let in the Goths and
Vandals, gave Roman Britain to the worship of Odin and Thor,
and in what were once the rich and populous provinces of the
East shivered the thinned ranks and palsied arms of the
legions on the cimiters of Mohammedan hordes, and in the
sepulchre of our Lord and in the Church of St. Sophia
trampled the cross to rear the crescent!

If you will go to Scotland, you may see great tracts that
under the Gaelic tenure, which recognized the right of each
to a foothold in the soil, bred sturdy men, but that now,
under the recognition of private property in land, are given
up to wild animals. If you go to Ireland, your Bishops will
show you, on lands where now only beasts graze, the traces
of hamlets that when they were young priests, were filled
with honest, kindly, religious people.

If you will come to the United States, you will find in a
land wide enough and rich enough to support in comfort the
whole population of Europe, the growth of a sentiment that
looks with evil eye on immigration, because the artificial
scarcity that results from private property in land makes it
seem as if there is not room enough and work enough for
those already here.

Or go to the Antipodes, and in Australia as in England, you
may see that private property in land is operating to leave
the land barren and to crowd the bulk of the population into
great cities. Go wherever you please where the forces loosed
by modern invention are beginning to be felt and you may see
that private property in land is the curse, denounced by the
prophet, that prompts men to lay field to field till they
"alone dwell in the midst of the earth."

To the mere materialist this is sin and shame. Shall we to
whom this world is God's world---we who hold that man is
called to this life only as a prelude to a higher
life---shall we defend it?

4\. *That Industry expended on land gives ownership in the
land itself. (9-10.)*

Your Holiness next contends that industry expended on land
gives a right to ownership of the land, and that the
improvement of land creates benefits indistinguishable and
inseparable from the land itself.

This contention, if valid, could only justify the ownership
of land by those who expend industry on it. It would not
justify private property in land as it exists. On the
contrary, it would justify a gigantic no-rent declaration
that would take land from those who now legally own it, the
landlords, and turn it over to the tenants and laborers. And
if it also be that improvements cannot be distinguished and
separated from the land itself, how could the landlords
claim consideration even for improvements they had made?

But your Holiness cannot mean what your words imply. What
you really mean, I take it, is that the original
justification and title of land ownership is in the
expenditure of labor on it. But neither can this justify
private property in land as it exists. For is it not all but
universally true that existing land titles do not come from
use, but from force or fraud?

Take Italy! Is it not true that the greater part of the land
of Italy is held by those who so far from ever having
expended industry on it have been mere appropriators of the
industry of those who have? Is this not also true of Great
Britain and of other countries? Even in the United States,
where the forces of concentration have not yet had time to
fully operate and there has been some attempt to give land
to users, it is probably true to-day that the greater part
of the land is held by those who neither use it nor propose
to use it themselves, but ' merely hold it to compel others
to pay them for permission to use it.

And if industry give ownership to land what are the limits
of this ownership? If a man may acquire the ownership of
several square miles of land by grazing sheep on it, does
this give to him and his heirs the ownership of the same
land when it is found to contain rich mines, or when by the
growth of population and the progress of society it is
needed for farming, for gardening, for the close occupation
of a great city? Is it on the rights given by the industry
of those who first used it for' grazing cows or growing
potatoes that you would found the title to the land now
covered by the city of New York and having a value of
thousands of millions of dollars?

But your contention is not valid. Industry expended on land
gives ownership in the fruits of that industry, but not in
the land itself, just as industry expended on the ocean
would give a right of ownership to the fish taken by it, but
not a right of ownership in the ocean. Nor yet is it true
that private ownership of land is necessary to secure the
fruits of labor on land; nor does the improvement of land
create benefits indistinguishable and inseparable from the
land itself. That secure possession is necessary to the use
and improvement of land I have already explained, but that
ownership is not necessary is shown by the fact that in all
civilized countries land owned by one person is cultivated
and improved by other persons. Most of the cultivated land
in the British Islands, as in Italy and other countries, is
cultivated not by owners but by tenants. And so the
costliest buildings are erected by those who are not owners
of the land, but who have from the owner a mere right of
possession for a time on condition of certain payments.
Nearly the whole of London has been built in this way, and
in New York, Chicago, Denver, San Francisco, Sydney and
Melbourne, as well as in continental cities, the owners of
many of the largest edifices will be found to be different
persons from the owners of the ground. So far from the value
of improvements being inseparable from the value of land, it
is in individual transactions constantly separated. For
instance, one-half of the land on which the immense Grand
Pacific Hotel in Chicago stands was recently separately
sold, and in Ceylon it is a not infrequent occurrence for
one person to own a fruit tree and another to own the ground
in which it is implanted.

There is, indeed, no improvement of land, whether it be
clearing, plowing, manuring, cultivating, the digging of
cellars, the opening of wells or the building of houses,
that so long as its usefulness continues does not have a
value clearly distinguishable from the value of the land.
For land having such improvements will always sell or rent
for more than similar land without them.

If, therefore, the state levy a tax equal to what the land
irrespective of improvement would bring, it will take the
benefits of mere ownership, but will leave the full benefits
of use and improvement, which the prevailing system does not
do. And since the holder, who would still in form continue
to be the owner, could at any time give or sell both
possession and improvements, subject to future assessment by
the state on the value of the land alone, he will be
perfectly free to retain or dispose of the full amount of
property that the exertion of his labor or the investment of
his capital has attached to or stored up in the land.

Thus, what we propose would secure, as it is impossible in
any other way to secure, what you properly say is just and
right---"that the results of labor should belong to him who
has labored." But private property in land---to allow the
holder without adequate payment to the state to take for
himself the benefit of the value that attaches to land with
social growth and improvement---does take the results of
labor from him who has labored, does turn over the fruits of
one man's labor to be enjoyed by another. For labor, as the
active factor, is the producer of all wealth. Mere ownership
produces nothing. A man might own a world, but so sure is
the decree that "by the sweat of thy brow shalt thou eat
bread," that without labor he could not get a meal or
provide himself a garment. Hence, when the owners of land,
by virtue of their ownership and without laboring
themselves, get the products of labor in abundance, these
things must come from the labor of others, must be the
fruits of others' sweat, taken from those who have a right
to them and enjoyed by those who have no right to them.

The only utility of private ownership of land as
distinguished from possession is the evil utility of giving
to the owner products of labor he does not earn. For until
land will yield to its owner some return beyond that of the
labor and capital he expends on it---that is to say, until
by sale or rental he can without expenditure of labor obtain
from it products of labor, ownership amounts to no more than
security of possession, and has no value. Its importance and
value begin only when, either in the present or
prospectively, it will yield a revenue---that is to say,
will enable the owner as owner to obtain products of labor
without exertion on his part, and thus to enjoy the results
of others' labor.

What largely keeps men from realizing the robbery involved
in private property in land is that in the most striking
cases the robbery is not of individuals, but of the
community. For, as I have before explained, it is impossible
for rent in the economic sense---that value which attaches
to land by reason of social growth and improvement---to go
to the user. It can go only to the owner or to the
community. Thus those who pay enormous rents for the use of
land in such centres as London or New York are not
individually injured. Individually they get a return for
what they pay, and must feel that they have no better right
to the use , of such peculiarly advantageous localities
without paying for it than have thousands of others. And so,
not thinking or not caring for the interests of the
community, they make no objection to the system.

It recently came to light in New York that a man having no
title whatever had been for years collecting rents on a
piece of land that the growth of the city had made very
valuable. Those who paid these rents had never stopped to
ask whether he had any right to them. They felt that they
had no right to land that so many others would like to have,
without paying for it, and did not think of, or did not care
for, the rights of all.

5\. *That private property in land has the support of the
common opinion of mankind, and has conduced to peace and
tranquillity, and that it is sanctioned by Divine Law.
(11.)*

Even were it true that the common opinion of mankind has
sanctioned private property in land, this would no more
prove its justice than the once universal practice of the
known world would have proved the justice of slavery.

But it is not true. Examination will show that wherever we
can trace them the first perceptions of mankind have always
recognized the equality of right to land, and that when
individual possession became necessary to secure the right
of ownership in things produced by labor some method of
securing equality, sufficient in the existing state of
social development, was adopted. Thus, among some peoples,
land used for cultivation was periodically divided, land
used for pasturage and wood being held in common. Among
others, every family was permitted to hold what land it
needed for a dwelling and for cultivation, but the moment
that such use and cultivation stopped any one else could
step in and take it on like tenure. Of the same nature were
the land laws of the Mosaic code. The land, first fairly
divided among the people, was made inalienable by the
provision of the jubilee, under which, if sold, it reverted
every fiftieth year to the children of its original
possessors.

Private property in land as we know it, the attaching to
land of the same right of ownership that justly attaches to
the products of labor, has never grown up anywhere save by
usurpation or force. Like slavery, it is the result of war.
It comes to us of the modern world from your ancestors, the
Romans, whose civilization it corrupted and whose empire it
destroyed.

It made with the freer spirit of the northern peoples the
combination of the feudal system, in which, though
subordination was substituted for equality, there was still
a rough recognition of the principle of common rights in
land. A fief was a trust, and to enjoyment was annexed some
obligation. The sovereign, the representative of the whole
people, was the only owner of land. Of him, immediately or
mediately, held tenants, whose possession involved duties or
payments, which, though rudely and imperfectly, embodied the
idea that we would carry out in the single tax, of taking
land values for public uses. The crown lands maintained the
sovereign and the civil list; the church lands defrayed the
cost of public worship and instruction, of the relief of the
sick, the destitute and the way-worn; while the military
tenures provided for public defense and bore the costs of
war. A fourth and very large portion of the land remained in
common, the people of the neighborhood being free to pasture
it, cut wood on it, or put it to other common uses.

In this partial yet substantial recognition of common rights
to land is to be found the reason why, in a time when the
industrial arts were rude, wars frequent, and the great
discoveries and inventions of our time unthought of, the
condition of the laborer was devoid of that grinding poverty
which despite our marvellous advances now exists. Speaking
of England, the highest authority on such subjects, the late
Professor Thorold Rogers, declares that in the thirteenth
century there was no class so poor, so helpless, so pressed
and degraded as are millions of Englishmen in our boasted
nineteenth century; and that, save in times of actual
famine, there was no laborer so poor as to fear that his
wife and children might come to want even were he taken from
them. Dark and rude in many respects as they were, these
were the times when the cathedrals and churches and
religious houses whose ruins yet excite our admiration were
built; the times when England had no national debt, no poor
law, no standing army, no hereditary paupers, no thousands
and thousands of human beings rising in the morning without
knowing where they might lay their heads at night.

With the decay of the feudal system, the system of private
property in land that had destroyed Rome was extended. As to
England, it may briefly be said that the crown lands were
for the most part given away to favorites; that the church
lands were parcelled among his courtiers by Henry VIII,and
in Scotland grasped by the nobles; that the military dues
were finally remitted in the seventeenth century, and
taxation on consumption substituted; and that by a process
beginning with the Tudors and extending to our own time all
but a mere fraction of the commons were enclosed by the
greater land owners; while the same private ownership of
land was extended over Ireland and the Scottish Highlands,
partly by the sword and partly by bribery of the chiefs.
Even the military dues, had they been commuted,, not
remitted, would to-day have more than sufficed to pay all
public expenses without one penny of other taxation.

Of the New World, whose institutions but continue those of
Europe, it is only necessary to say that to the parcelling
out of land in great tracts is due the backwardness and
turbulence of Spanish America; that to the large plantations
of the Southern States of the Union was due the persistence
of slavery there, and that the more northern settlements
showed the earlier English feeling, land being fairly well
divided and the attempts to establish manorial estates
coming to little or nothing. In this lies the secret of the
more vigorous growth of the northern states. But the idea
that land was to be treated as private property had been
thoroughly established in English thought before the
colonial period ended, and it has been so treated by the
United States and by the several States. And though land was
at first sold cheaply, and then given to actual settlers, it
was also sold in large quantities to speculators, given away
in great tracts for railroads and other purposes, until now
the public domain of the United States, which a generation
ago seemed illimitable, has practically gone. And this, as
the experience of other countries shows, is the natural
result in a growing community of making land private
property. When the possession of land means the gain of
unearned wealth, the strong and unscrupulous will secure it.
But when, as we propose, economic rent, the "unearned
increment of wealth," is taken by the state for the use of
the community, then land will pass into the hands of users
and remain there, since no matter how great its value, its
possession will only be profitable to users.

As to private property in land having conduced to the peace
and tranquillity of human life, it is not necessary more
than to allude to the notorious fact that the struggle for
land has been the prolific source of wars and of law suits,
while it is the poverty engendered by private property in
land that make the prison and the workhouse the unfailing
attributes of what we call Christian civilization.

Your Holiness intimates that the Divine Law gives its
sanction to the private ownership of land, quoting from
Deuteronomy, "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor
his house, nor his field, nor his manservant, nor his
maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything which is
his."

If, as your Holiness conveys, this inclusion of the words,
"nor his field," is to be taken as sanctioning private
property in land as it exists to-day, then, but with far
greater force, must the words, "his manservant, nor his
maid-servant," be taken to sanction chattel slavery; for it
is evident from other provisions of the same code that these
terms referred both to bondsmen for a term of years and to
perpetual slaves. But the word "field" involves the idea of
use and improvement, to which the right of possession and
ownership does attach without recognition of property in the
land itself. And that this reference to the "field" is not a
sanction of private property in land as it exists to-day is
proved by the fact that the Mosaic code expressly denied
such unqualified ownership in land, and with the
declaration, "the land also shall not be sold forever,
because it is mine, and you are strangers and sojourners
with me," provided for its reversion every fiftieth year;
thus, in a way adapted to the primitive industrial
conditions of the time, securing to all of the chosen people
a foothold in the soil.

Nowhere in fact throughout the Scriptures can the slightest
justification be found for the attaching to land of the same
right of property that justly attaches to the things
produced by labor. Everywhere is it treated as the free
bounty of God, "the land which the Lord thy God giveth
thee."

6\. *That fathers should provide for their children and that
private property in land is necessary to enable them to do
so. (14-17.)*

With all that your Holiness has to say of the sacredness of
the family relation we are in full accord. But how the
obligation of the father to the child can justify private
property in land we cannot see. You reason that private
property in land is necessary to the discharge of the duty
of the father, and is therefore requisite and just,
because---

"It is a most sacred law of nature that a father must
provide food and all necessities for those whom he has
begotten; and similarly nature dictates that a man's
children, who carry on as it were and continue his own
personality, should be provided by him with all that is
needful to enable them honorably to keep themselves from
want and misery in the uncertainties of this mortal life.
Now in no other way can a father effect this except by the
ownership of profitable property, which he can transmit to
his children by inheritance." (14.)

Thanks to Him who has bound the generations of men together
by a provision that brings the tenderest love to greet our
entrance into the world and soothes our exit with filial
piety, it is both the duty and the joy of the father to care
for the child till its powers mature, and afterwards in the
natural order it becomes the duty and privilege of the child
to be the stay of the parent. This is the natural reason for
that relation of marriage, the ground work of the sweetest,
tenderest and purest of human joys, which the Catholic
Church has guarded, with such unremitting vigilance.

We do, for a few years, need the providence of our fathers
after the flesh. But how small, how transient, how narrow is
this need, as compared with our constant need for the
providence of Him in whom we live, move and have our
being---Our Father who art in Heaven! It is to Him, "the
giver of every good and perfect gift," and not to our
fathers after the flesh, that Christ taught us to pray,
"Give us this day our daily bread." And how true it is that
it is through Him that the generations of men exist. Let the
mean temperature of the earth rise or fall a few degrees, an
amount as nothing compared with differences produced in our
laboratories, and mankind would disappear as ice disappears
under a tropical sun, would fall as the leaves fall at the
touch of frost. Or, let for two or three seasons the earth
refuse her increase, and how many of our millions would
remain alive?

The duty of fathers to transmit to their children profitable
property that will enable them to keep themselves from want
and misery in the uncertainties of this mortal life! What is
not possible cannot be a duty. And how is it possible for
fathers to do that? Your Holiness has not considered how
mankind really lives from hand to mouth, getting each day
its daily bread; how little one generation does or can leave
another. It is doubtful if the wealth of the civilized world
all told amounts to anything like as much as one year's
labor, while it is certain that if labor were to stop and
men had to rely on existing accumulation, it would be only a
few days ere in the richest countries pestilence and famine
would stalk.

The profitable property your Holiness refers to, is private
property in land. Now profitable land, as all economists
will agree, is land superior to the land that the ordinary
man can get. It is land that will yield an income to the
owner as owner, and therefore that will permit the owner to
appropriate the products of labor without doing labor, its
profitableness to the individual involving the robbery of
other individuals. It is therefore possible only for some
fathers to leave their children profitable land. What
therefore your Holiness practically declares is, that it is
the duty of all fathers to struggle to leave their children
what only the few peculiarly strong, lucky or unscrupulous
can leave; and that, a something that involves the robbery
of others---their deprivation of the material gifts of God.

This anti-Christian doctrine has been long in practice
throughout the Christian world. What are its results?

Are they not the very evils set forth in your Encyclical?
Are they not, so far from enabling men to keep themselves
from want and misery in the uncertainties of this mortal
life, to condemn the great masses of men to want and misery
that the natural conditions of our mortal life do not
entail; to want and misery deeper and more widespread than
exist among heathen savages? Under the regime of private
property in land and in the richest countries not five per
cent, of fathers are able at their death to leave anything
substantial to their children, and probably a large majority
do not leave enough to bury them! Some few children are left
by their fathers richer than it is good for them to be, but
the vast majority not only are left nothing by their
fathers, but by the system that makes land private property
are deprived of the bounty of their Heavenly Father; are
compelled to sue others for permission to live and to work,
and to toil all their lives for a pittance that often does
not enable them to escape starvation and pauperism.

What your Holiness is actually, though of course
inadvertently, urging, is that earthly fathers should assume
the functions of the Heavenly Father. It is not the business
of one generation to provide the succeeding generation with
"all that is needful to enable them honorably to keep
themselves from want and misery." That is God's business. We
no more create our children than we create our fathers. It
is God who is the Creator of each succeeding generation as
fully as of the one that preceded it. And, to recall your
own words (7), "Nature \[God\] therefore owes to man a
storehouse that shall never fail, the daily supply of his
daily wants. And this he finds only in the inexhaustible
fertility of the earth." What you are now assuming is, that
it is the duty of men to provide for the wants of *their*
children by appropriating this storehouse and depriving
other men's children of the unfailing supply that God has
provided for all.

The duty of the father to the child---the duty possible to
all fathers! Is it not so to conduct himself, so to nurture
and teach it, that it shall come to manhood with a sound
body, well developed mind, habits of virtue, piety and
industry, and in a state of society that shall give it and
all others free access to the bounty of God, the providence
of the All-Father?

In doing this the father would be doing more to secure his
children from want and misery than is possible now to the
richest of fathers---as much more as the providence of God
surpasses that of man. For the justice of God laughs at the
efforts of men to circumvent it, and the subtle law that
binds humanity together poisons the rich in the sufferings
of the poor. Even the few who are able in the general
struggle to leave their children wealth that they fondly
think will keep them from want and misery in the
uncertainties of this mortal life---do they succeed % Does
experience show that it is a benefit to a child to place him
above his fellows and enable him to think God's law of labor
is not for him? Is not such wealth of truer a curse than a
blessing, and does not its expectation often destroy filial
love and bring dissensions and heart burnings into families?
And how far and how long are even the richest and strongest
able to exempt their children from the common lot? Nothing
is more certain than that the blood of the masters of the
world flows to-day in lazzaroni and that the descendants of
kings and princes tenant slums and workhouses.

But in the state of society we strive for, where the
monopoly and waste of God's bounty would be done away with
and the fruits of labor would go to the laborer, it would be
within the ability of all to make more than a comfortable
living with reasonable labor. And for those who might be
crippled or incapacitated, or deprived of their natural
protectors and bread winners, the most ample provision could
be made out of that great and increasing fund with which God
in his law of rent has provided society---not as a matter of
niggardly and degrading alms, but as a matter of right, as
the assurance which in a Christian state society owes to all
its members.

Thus it is that the duty of the father, the obligation to
the child, instead of giving any support to private property
in land, utterly condemns it, urging us by the most powerful
considerations to abolish it in the simple and efficacious
way of the single tax.

This duty of the father, this obligation to children, is not
confined to those who have actually children of their own,
but rests on all of us who have come to the powers and
responsibilities of manhood.

For did not Christ set a little child in the midst of the
disciples, saying to them that the angels of such little
ones always behold the face of His father; saying to them
that it were better for a man to hang a millstone about his
neck and plunge into the uttermost depths of the sea than to
injure such a little one?

And what to-day is the result of private property in land in
the richest of so called Christian countries? Is it not that
young people fear to marry; that married people fear to have
children; that children are driven out of life from sheer
want of proper nourishment and care, or compelled to toil
when they ought to be at school or at play; that great
numbers of those who attain maturity enter it with
under-nourished bodies, overstrained nerves, undeveloped
minds---under conditions that foredoom them, not merely to
suffering, but to crime; that fit them in advance for the
prison and the brothel?

If your Holiness will consider these things we are confident
that instead of defending private property in land you will
condemn it with anathema!

7\. *That the private ownership of land stimulates industry,
increases wealth, and attaches men to the soil and to their
country. (51.)*

The idea, as expressed by Arthur Young, that "the magic of
property turns barren sands to gold" springs from the
confusion of ownership with possession, of which I have
before spoken, that attributes to private property in land
what is due to security of the products of labor. It is
needless for me again to point out that the change we
propose, the taxation for public uses of land values, or
economic rent, and the abolition of other taxes, would give
to the user of land far greater security for the fruits of
his labor than the present system and far greater permanence
of possession. Nor is it necessary further to show how it
would give homes to those who are now homeless and bind men
to their country. For under it every one who wanted a piece
of land for a home or for productive use could get it
without purchase price and hold it even without tax, since
the tax we propose would not fall on all land, nor even on
all land in use, but only on land better than 'the poorest
land in use, and is in reality not a tax at all, but merely
a return to the state for the use of a valuable privilege.
And even those who from circumstances or occupation did not
wish to make permanent use of land would still have an equal
interest with all others in the land of their country and in
the general prosperity.

But I should like your Holiness to consider how utterly
unnatural is the condition of the masses in the richest and
most progressive of Christian countries; how large bodies of
them live in habitations in which a rich man would not ask
his dog to dwell; how the great majority have no homes from
which they are not liable on the slightest misfortune to be
evicted; how numbers have no homes at all, but must seek
what shelter chance or charity offers. I should like to ask
your Holiness to consider how the great majority of men in
such countries have no interest whatever in what they are
taught to call *their* native land, for which they are told
that on occasions it is their duty to fight or to die. What
right, for instance, have the majority of your countrymen in
the land of their birth? Can they live in Italy outside of a
prison or a poorhouse except as they buy the privilege from
some of the exclusive owners of Italy? Cannot an English
man, an American, an Arab or a Japanese do as much? May not
what was said centuries ago by Tiberius Gracchus be said
to-day: "*Men of Rome! you are called the lords of the
world, yet have no right to a square foot of its soil! The
wild leasts have their dens, but the soldiers of Italy have
only water and air!*" What is true of Italy is true of the
civilized world---is becoming increasingly true. It is the
inevitable effect as civilization progresses of private
property in land.

8\. *That the right to possess private property in land is
from Nature, not from, man; that the state has no right to
abolish it, and that to take the value of land ownership in
taxation would be unjust and cruel to the private owner.
(51).*

This, like much else that your Holiness says, is masked in
the use of the indefinite terms private property and private
owner---a want of precision in the use of words that has
doubtless aided in the confusion of your own thought. But
the context leaves no doubt that by private property you
mean private property in land, and by private owner, the
private owner of land.

The contention, thus made, that private property in land is
from nature, not from man, has no other basis than the
confounding of ownership with possession and the ascription
to property in land of what belongs to its contradictory,
property in the proceeds of labor. You do not attempt to
show for it any other basis, nor has any one else ever
attempted to do so. That private property in the products of
labor is from nature is clear, for nature gives such things
to labor and to labor alone. Of every article of this kind,
we know that it came into being as nature's response to the
exertion of an individual man or of individual men---given
by nature directly and exclusively to him or to them. Thus
there inheres in such things a right of private property,
which originates from and goes back to the source of
ownership, the maker of the thing. This right is anterior to
the state and superior to its enactments, so that, as we
hold, it is a violation of natural right and an injustice to
the private owner for the state to tax the processes and
products of labor. They do not belong to Caesar. They are
things that God, of whom nature is but an expression, gives
to those who apply for them in the way He has appointed---by
labor.

But who will dare trace the individual ownership of land to
any grant from the Maker of land? What does nature give to
such ownership? how does she in any way recognize it? Will
any one show from difference of form or feature, of stature
or complexion, from dissection of their bodies or analysis
of their powers and needs, that one man was intended by
nature to own land and another to live on it as his tenant!
That which derives its existence from man and passes away
like him, which is indeed but the evanescent expression of
his labor, man may hold and transfer as the exclusive
property of the individual; but how can such individual
ownership attach to land, which existed before man was, and
which continues to exist while the generations of men come
and go---the unfailing storehouse that the Creator gives to
man for "the daily support of his daily wants?"

Clearly, the private ownership of land is from the state,
not from nature. Thus, not merely can no objection be made
on the score of morals when it is proposed that the state
shall abolish it altogether, bat insomuch as it is a
violation of natural right, its existence involving a gross
injustice on the part of the state, an "impious violation of
the benevolent intention of the Creator," it is a moral duty
that the state so abolish it.

So far from there being anything unjust in taking the full
value of land ownership for the use of the community, the
real injustice is in leaving it in private hands---an
injustice that amounts to robbery and murder.

And when your Holiness shall see this I have no fear that
you will listen for one moment to the impudent plea that
before the community can take what God intended it to take,
before men who have been disinherited of their natural
rights can be restored to them, the present owners of land
shall first be compensated.

For not only will you see that the single tax will directly
and largely benefit small land owners, whose interests as
laborers and capitalists are much greater than their
interests as land owners, and that though the great
landowners---or rather the propertied class in general among
whom the profits of land ownership are really divided
through mortgages, rent charges, etc.---would relatively
lose, they too would be absolute gainers in the increased
prosperity and improved morals; but more quickly, more
strongly, more peremptorily than from any calculation of
gains or losses would your duty as a man, your faith as a
Christian, forbid you to listen for one moment to any such
paltering with right and wrong.

Where me state takes some land for public uses it is only
just that those whose land is taken should be compensated,
otherwise some land owners would be treated more harshly
than others. But where, by a measure affecting all alike,
rent is appropriated for the benefit of all, there can be no
claim to compensation. Compensation in such case would be a
continuance of the same injustice in another form---the
giving to land owners in the shape of interest of what they
before got as rent. Your Holiness knows that justice and
injustice are not thus to be juggled with, and when you
fully realize that land is really the storehouse that God
owes to all His children, you will no more listen to any
demand for compensation for restoring it to them than Moses
would have listened to a demand that Pharaoh should be
compensated before letting the children of Israel go.

Compensated for what? For giving up what has been unjustly
taken? The demand of land owners for compensation is not
that. We do not seek to spoil the Egyptians. We do not ask
that what has been unjustly taken from laborers shall be
restored. We are willing that bygones should be bygones and
to leave dead wrongs to bury their dead. We propose to let
those who by the past appropriation of land value have taken
the fruits of labor to retain what they have thus got. We
merely propose that for the future such robbery of labor
shall cease---that for the future, not for the past,
landholders shall pay to the community the rent that to the
community is justly due.

# III

I have said enough to show your Holiness the injustice into
which you fall in classing us, who in seeking virtually to
abolish private property in land seek more fully to secure
the true rights of property, with those whom you speak of as
socialists, who wish to make all property common. But you
also do injustice to the socialists.

There are many, it is true, who feeling bitterly the
monstrous wrongs of the present distribution of wealth are
animated only by a blind hatred of the rich and a fierce
desire to destroy existing social adjustments. This class is
indeed only less dangerous than those who proclaim that no
social improvement is needed or is possible. But it is not
fair to confound with them those who, however mistakenly,
propose definite schemes of remedy.

The socialists, as I understand them, and as the term has
come to apply to anything like a definite theory and not to
be vaguely and improperly used to include all who desire
social improvement, do not, as you imply, seek the abolition
of all private property. Those who do this are properly
called communists. What the socialists seek is the state
assumption of capital (in which they vaguely and erroneously
include land), or more properly speaking, of large capitals,
and state management and direction of at least the larger
operations of industry. In this way they hope to abolish
interest, which they regard as a wrong and an evil; to do
away with the gains of exchangers, speculators, contractors
and middlemen, which they regard as waste; to do away with
the wage system and secure general co-operation j and to
prevent competition, which they deem the fundamental cause
of the impoverishment of labor. The more moderate of them,
without going so far, go in the same direction, and seek
some remedy or palliation of the worst forms of poverty by
government regulation. The essential character of socialism
is that it looks to the extension of the functions of the
state for the remedy of social evils; that it would
substitute regulation and direction for competition; and
intelligent control by organized society for the free play
of individual desire and effort.

Though not usually classed as socialists, both the trades
unionists and the protectionists have the same essential
character. The trades unionists seek the increase of wages,
the reduction of working hours and the general improvement
in the condition of wage-workers, by organizing them into
guilds or associations which shall fix the rates at which
they will sell their labor; shall deal as one body with
employers in case of dispute; shall use on occasion their
necessary weapon, the strike; and shall accumulate funds for
such purposes and for the purpose of assisting members when
on a strike, or (sometimes) when out of employment. The
protectionists seek by governmental prohibitions or taxes on
imports to regulate the industry and control the exchanges
of each country, so, as they imagine, to diversify home
industries and prevent the competition of people of other
countries.

At the opposite extreme are the anarchists, a term which,
though frequently applied to mere violent destructionists,
refers also to those who, seeing the many evils of too much
government, regard government in itself as evil, and believe
that in the absence of coercive power the mutual interests
of men would secure voluntarily what co-operation is needed.

Differing from all these are those for whom 1 would speak.
Believing that the rights of true property are sacred, we
would regard forcible communism as robbery that would bring
destruction. But we would not be disposed to deny that
voluntary communism might be the highest possible state of
which men can conceive. Nor do we say that it cannot be
possible for mankind to attain it, since among the early
Christians and among the religious orders of the Catholic
church we have examples of communistic societies on a small
scale. St. Peter and St. Paul, St. Thomas Aquinas and Fra
Angelico, the illustrious orders of the Carmelites and
Franciscans, the Jesuits, whose heroism carried the cross
among the most savage tribes of American forests, the
societies that wherever your communion is known have deemed
no work of mercy too dangerous or too repellent---were or
are communists. Knowing these things we cannot take it on
ourselves to say that a social condition may not be possible
in which an all-embracing love shall have taken the place of
all other motives. But we see that communism is only
possible where there exists a general and intense religious
faith, and we see that such a state can be reached only
through a state of justice. For before a man can be a saint
he must first be an honest man.

With both anarchists and socialists, we, who for want of a
better term have come to call ourselves single tax men,
fundamentally differ. We regard them as erring in opposite
directions---the one in ignoring the social nature of man,
the other in ignoring his individual nature. While we see
that man is primarily an individual, and that nothing but
evil has come or can come from the interference by the state
with things that belong to individual action, we also see
that he is a social being, or, as Aristotle called him, a
political animal, and that the state is requisite to social
advance, having an indispensable place in the natural order.
Looking ou the bodily organism as the analogue of the social
organism, and on the proper functions of the state as akin
to those that in the human organism are discharged by the
conscious intelligence, while the play of individual impulse
and interest performs functions akin to those discharged in
the bodily organism by the unconscious instincts and
involuntary motions, the anarchists seem to us like men who
would try to get along without heads and the socialists like
men who would try to rule the wonderfully complex and
delicate internal relations of their frames by conscious
will.

The philosophical anarchists of whom I speak are few in
number, and of little practical importance. It is with
socialism in its various phases that we have to do battle.

With the socialists we have some points of agreement, for we
recognize fully the social nature of man and believe that
all monopolies should be held and governed by the state. In
these, and in directions where the general health,
knowledge, comfort and convenience might be improved, we,
too, would extend the functions of the state.

But it seems to us the vice of socialism in all its degrees
is its want of radicalism, of going to the root. It takes
its theories from those who have sought to justify the
impoverishment of the masses, and its advocates generally
teach the preposterous and degrading doctrine that slavery
was the first condition of labor. It assumes that the
tendency of wages to a minimum is the natural law, and seeks
to abolish wages; it assumes that the natural result of
competition is to grind down workers, and seeks to abolish
competition by restrictions, prohibitions and extensions of
governing power. Thus mistaking effects for causes, and
childishly blaming the stone for hitting it, it wastes
strength in striving for remedies that when not worse are
futile. Associated though it is in many places with
democratic aspiration, yet its essence is the same delusion
to which the Children of Israel yielded when against the
protest of their prophet they insisted on a king; the
delusion that has everywhere corrupted democracies and
enthroned tyrants---that power over the people can be used
for the benefit of the people; that there may be devised
machinery that through human agencies will secure for the
management of individual affairs more wisdom and more virtue
than the people themselves possess.

This superficiality and this tendency may be seen in all the
phases of socialism.

Take, for instance, protectionism. What support it has,
beyond the mere selfish desire of sellers to compel buyers
to pay them more than their goods are worth, springs from
such superficial ideas as that production, not consumption,
is the end of effort; that money is more valuable than
money's worth, and to sell more profitable than to buy; and
above all from a desire to limit competition, springing from
an unanalyzing recognition of the phenomena that necessarily
follow when men who have the need to labor are deprived by
monopoly of access to the natural and indispensable element
of all labor. Its methods involve the idea that governments
can more wisely direct the expenditure of labor and the
investment of capital than can laborers and capitalists, and
that the men who control governments will use this power for
the general good and not in their own interests. They tend
to multiply officials, restrict liberty, invent crimes. They
promote perjury, fraud and corruption. And they would, were
the theory carried to its logical conclusion, destroy
civilization and reduce mankind to savagery.

Take trades unionism. While within narrow lines trades
unionism promotes the idea of the mutuality of interests,
and often helps to raise courage and further political
education, and while it has enabled limited bodies of
workingmen to improve somewhat their condition, and gain, as
it were, breathing space, yet it takes no note of the
general causes that determine the conditions of labor, and
strives for the elevation of only a small part of the great
body by means that cannot help the rest. Aiming at the
restriction of competition---the limitation of the right to
labor, its methods are like those of an army, which even in
a righteous cause are subversive of liberty and liable to
abuse, while its weapon, the strike, is destructive in its
nature, both to combatants and non-combatants, being a form
of passive war. To apply the principle of trades unions to
all industry, as some dream of doing, would be to enthrall
men in a caste system.

Or take even such moderate measures as the limitation of
working hours and of the labor of women and children. They
are superficial in looking no further than to the eagerness
of men and women and little children to work unduly, and in
proposing forcibly to restrain overwork while utterly
ignoring its cause, the sting of poverty that forces human
beings to it. And the methods by which these restraints must
be enforced, multiply officials, interfere with personal
liberty, tend to corruption, and are liable to abuse.

As for thorough going socialism, which is the more to be
honoured as having the courage of its convictions, it would
carry these vices to full expression. Jumping to conclusions
without effort to discover causes, it fails to see that
oppression does not come from the nature of capital, but
from the wrong that robs labor of capital by divorcing it
from land, and that creates a fictitious capital that is
really capitalized monopoly. It fails to see that it would
be impossible for capital to oppress labor were labor free
to the natural material of production; that the wage system
in itself springs from mutual convenience, being a form of
co-operation in which one of the parties prefers a certain
to a contingent result; and that what it calls the "iron law
of wages" is not the natural law of wages, but only the law
of wages in that unnatural condition in which men are made
helpless by being deprived of the materials for life and
work. It fails to see that what it mistakes for the evils of
competition are really the evils of restricted
competition---are due to a one sided competition to which
men are forced when deprived of land. While its methods, the
organization of men into industrial armies, the direction
and control of all production and exchange by governmental
or semi-governmental bureaus, would, if carried to full
expression, mean Egyptian despotism.

We differ from the socialists in our diagnosis of the evil
and we differ from them as to remedies. We have no fear of
capital, regarding it as the natural handmaiden of labor; we
look on interest in itself as natural and just; we would set
no limit to accumulation, nor impose on the rich any burden
that is not equally placed on the poor; we see no evil in
competition, but deem unrestricted competition to be as
necessary to the health of the industrial and social
organism as the free circulation of the blood is to the
health of the bodily organism---to be the agency whereby the
fullest co-operation is to be secured. We would simply take
for the community what belongs to the community, the value
that attaches to land by the growth of the community; leave
sacredly to the individual all that belongs to the
individual; and, treating necessary monopolies as functions
of the state, abolish all restrictions and prohibitions save
those required for public health, safety, morals and
convenience.

But the fundamental difference---the difference I ask your
Holiness specially to note, is in this: socialism in all its
phases looks on the evils of our civilization as springing
from the inadequacy or disharmony of natural relations,
which must be artificially organized or improved. In its
idea there devolves on the state the necessity of
intelligently organizing the industrial relations of men;
the construction, as it were, of a great machine whose
complicated parts shall properly work together under the
direction of human intelligence. This is the reason why
socialism tends towards atheism. Failing to see the order
and symmetry of natural law, it fails to recognize God.

On the other hand, we who call ourselves single tax men (a
name which expresses merely our practical propositions) see
in the social and industrial relations of men not a machine
which requires construction, but an organism which needs
only to be suffered to grow. We see in the natural social
and industrial laws such harmony as we see in the
adjustments of the human body, and that as far transcends
the power of man's intelligence to order and direct as it is
beyond man's intelligence to order and direct the vital
movements of his frame. We see in these social and
industrial laws so close a relation to the moral law as must
spring from the same Authorship, and that proves the moral
law to be the sure guide of man where his intelligence would
wander and go astray. Thus, to us, all that is needed to
remedy the evils of our time is to do justice and give
freedom. This is the reason why our beliefs tend towards,
nay are indeed the only beliefs consistent with a firm and
reverent faith in God, and with the recognition of His law
as the supreme law which men must follow if they would
secure prosperity and avoid destruction. This is the reason
why to us political economy only serves to show the depth of
wisdom in the simple truths which common people heard gladly
from the lips of Him of whom it was said with wonder, "Is
not this the Carpenter of Nazareth?"

And it is because that in what we propose---the securing to
all men of equal natural opportunities for the exercise of
their powers and the removal of all legal restriction on the
legitimate exercise of those powers---we see the
conformation of human law to the moral law, that we hold
with confidence not merely that this is the sufficient
remedy for all the evils you so strikingly portray, but that
it is the only possible remedy.

Nor is there any other. The organization of man is such, his
relations to the world in which he is placed are such---that
is to say, the immutable laws of God are such, that it is
beyond the power of human ingenuity to devise any way by
which the evils born of the injustice that robs men of their
birthright can be removed otherwise than by doing justice,
by opening to all the bounty that God has provided for all.

Since man can live only on land and from land, since land is
the reservoir of matter and force from which man's body
itself is taken, and on which he must draw for all that he
can produce, does it not irresistibly follow that to give
the land in ownership to some men and to deny to others all
right to it is to divide mankind into the rich and the poor,
the privileged and the helpless? Does it not follow that
those who have no rights to the use of land can live only by
selling their power to labor to those who own the land? Does
it not follow that what the socialists call "the iron law of
wages," what the political economists term "the tendency of
wages to a minimum," must take from the landless
masses---the mere laborers, who of themselves have no power
to use their labor---all the benefits of any possible
advance or improvement that does not alter this unjust
division of land. For having no power to employ themselves,
they must, either as labor sellers or land renters, compete
with one another for permission to labor. This competition
with one another of men shut out from God's inexhaustible
storehouse has no limit but starvation, and must ultimately
force wages to their lowest point, the point at which life
can just be maintained and reproduction carried on.

This is not to say that all wages must fall to this point,
but that the wages of that necessarily largest stratum of
laborers who have only ordinary knowledge, skill and
aptitude must so fall. The wages of special classes, who are
fenced off from the pressure of competition by peculiar
knowledge, skill or other causes, may remain above that
ordinary level. Thus, where the ability to read and write is
rare its possession enables a man to obtain higher wages
than the ordinary laborer. But as the diffusion of education
makes the ability to read and write general this advantage
is lost. So when a vocation requires special training or
skill, or is made difficult of access by artificial
restrictions, the checking of competition tends to keep
wages in it at a higher level. But as the progress of
invention dispenses with peculiar skill, or artificial
restrictions are broken down, these higher wages sink to the
ordinary level. And so, it is only so long as they are
special that such qualities as industry, prudence and thrift
can enable the ordinary laborer to maintain a condition
above that which gives a mere living. Where they become
general, the law of competition must reduce the earnings or
savings of such qualities to the general level---which, land
being monopolized and labor helpless, can be only that at
which the next lowest point is the cessation of life.

Or, to state the same thing in another way: Land being
necessary to life and labor, its owners will be able, in
return for permission to use it, to obtain from mere
laborers all that labor can produce, save enough to enable
such of them to maintain life as are wanted by the land
owners and their dependents.

Thus, where private property in land has divided society
into a land owning class and a landless class, there is no
possible invention or improvement, whether it be industrial,
social or moral, which, so long as it does not affect the
ownership of land, can prevent poverty or relieve the
general conditions of mere laborers. For whether the effect
of any invention or improvement be to increase what labor
can produce or to decrease what is required to support the
laborer, it can, so soon as it becomes general, result only
in increasing the income of the owners of land, without at
all benefiting the mere laborers. In no event can those
possessed of the mere ordinary power to labor, a power
utterly useless without the means necessary to labor, keep
more of their earnings than enough to enable them to live.

How true this is we may see in the facts of to-day. In our
own time invention and discovery have enormously increased
the productive power of labor, and at the same time greatly
reduced the cost of many things necessary to the support of
the laborer. Have these improvements anywhere raised the
earnings of the mere laborer? Have not their benefits mainly
gone to the owners of land---enormously increased land
values?

I say mainly, for some part of the benefit has gone to the
cost of monstrous standing armies and warlike preparations;
to the payment of interest on great public debts; and r
largely disguised as interest on fictitious capital, to the
owners of monopolies other than that of land. But
improvements that would do away with these wastes would not
benefit labor; they would simply increase the profits of
land owners. Were standing armies and all their incidents
abolished, were all monopolies other than that of land done
away with, were governments to become models of economy,
were the profits of speculators, of middlemen, of all sorts
of exchangers saved, were every one to become so strictly
honest that no policemen, no courts, no prisons, no
precautions against dishonesty would be needed---the result
would not differ from that which has followed the increase
of productive power.

Nay, would not these very blessings bring starvation to many
of those who now manage to live? Is it not true that if
there were proposed to-day, what all Christian men ought to
pray for, the complete disbandment of all the armies of
Europe, the greatest fears would be aroused for the
consequences of throwing on the labor market so many
unemployed laborers?

The explanation of this and of similar paradoxes that in our
time perplex on every side may be easily seen. The effect of
all inventions and improvements that increase productive
power, that save waste and economize effort, is to lessen
the labor required for a given result, and thus to save
labor, so that we speak of them as labor saving' inventions
or improvements. Now, in a natural state of society where
the rights of all to the use of the earth are acknowledged,
labor saving improvements might go to the very utmost that
can be imagined without lessening the demand for men, since
in such natural conditions the demand for men lies in their
own enjoyment of life and the strong instincts that the
Creator has implanted in the human breast. But in that
unnatural state of society where the masses of men are
disinherited of all but the power to labor when opportunity
to labor is given them by others, there the demand for them
becomes simply the demand for their services by those who
hold this opportunity, and man himself becomes a commodity.
Hence, although the natural effect of labor saving
improvement is to increase wages, yet in the unnatural
condition which private ownership of the land begets, the
effect, even of such moral improvements as the disbandment
of armies and the saving of the labor that vice entails, is
by lessening the commercial demand, to lower wages and
reduce mere laborers to starvation or pauperism. If labor
saving inventions and improvements could be carried to the
very abolition of the necessity for labor, what would be the
result? Would it not be that land owners could then get all
the wealth that the land was capable of producing, and would
have no need at all for laborers, who must then either
starve or live as pensioners on the bounty of the land
owners?

Thus, so long as private property in land continues---so
long as some men are treated as owners of the earth and
other men can live on it only by their sufferance---human
wisdom can devise no means by which the evils of our present
condition may be avoided.

Nor yet could the wisdom of God.

By the light of that right reason of which St. Thomas speaks
we may see that even He, the Almighty, so long as His laws
remain what they are, could do nothing to prevent poverty
and starvation while property in land continues.

How could He? Should he infuse new vigor into the sunlight,
new virtue into the air, new fertility into the soil, would
not all this new bounty go to the owners of the land, and
work not benefit, but rather injury, to mere laborers?
Should He open the minds of men to the possibilities of new
substances, new adjustments, new powers, could this do any
more to relieve poverty than steam, electricity and all the
numberless discoveries and inventions of our time have done?
Or, if He were to send down from the heavens above or cause
to gush up from the subterranean depths, food, clothing, all
the things that satisfy man's material desires, to whom
under our laws would all these belong? So far from
benefiting man, would not this increase and extension of His
bounty prove but a curse, enabling the privileged class more
riotously to roll in wealth, and bringing the disinherited
class to more widespread starvation or pauperism?

# IV

Believing that the social question is at bottom a religious
question, we deem it of happy augury to the world that in
your Encyclical the most influential of all religious
teachers has directed attention to the condition of labor.

But while we appreciate the many wholesome truths you utter,
while we feel, as all must feel, that you are animated by a
desire to help the suffering and oppressed, and to put an
end to any idea that the Church is divorced from the
aspiration for liberty and progress, yet it is painfully
obvious to us that one fatal assumption hides from you the
cause of the evils you see, and makes it impossible for you
to propose any adequate remedy. This assumption is, that
private property in land is of the same nature and has the
same sanctions as private property in things produced by
labor. In spite of its undeniable truths and its benevolent
spirit, your Encyclical shows you to be involved in such
difficulties as a physician called to examine one suffering
from disease of the stomach would meet should he begin with
a refusal to consider the stomach.

Prevented by this assumption from seeing the true cause, the
only causes you find it possible to assign for the growth of
misery and wretchedness are the destruction of workingmen's
guilds in the last century, the repudiation in public
institutions and laws of the ancient religion, rapacious
usury, the custom of working by contract, and the
concentration of trade.

Such diagnosis is manifestly inadequate to account for evils
that are alike felt in Catholic countries, in Protestant
countries, in countries that adhere to the Greek communion
and in countries where no religion is professed by the
state; that are alike felt in old countries and in new
countries; where industry is simple and where it is most
elaborate; and amid all varieties of industrial customs and
relations.

But the real cause will be clear if you will consider that
since labor must find its workshop and reservoir in land,
the labor question is but another name for the land
question, and will re-examine your assumption that private
property in land is necessary and right.

See how fully adequate is the cause I have pointed out. The
most important of all the material relations of man is his
relation to the planet he inhabits, and hence, the "impious
resistance to the benevolent intentions of his Creator,"
which, as Bishop Nulty says, is involved in private property
in land, *must* produce evils wherever it exists. But by
virtue of the law, "unto whom much is given, from him much
is required," the very progress of civilization makes the
evils produced by private property in land more widespread
and intense.

What is producing throughout the civilized world that
condition of things you rightly describe as in tolerable is
not this and that local error or minor mistake. It is
nothing less than the progress of civilization itself;
nothing less than the intellectual advance and the material
growth in which our century has been so pre-eminent, acting
in a state of society based on private property in land;
nothing less than the new gifts that in our time God has
been showering on man, but which are being turned into
scourges by man's "impious resistance to the benevolent
intention of his Creator."

The discoveries of science, the gains of invention have
given to us in this wonderful century more than has been
given to men in any time before; and, in a degree so rapidly
accelerating as to suggest geometrical progression, are
placing in our hands new material powers. But with the
benefit comes the obligation. In a civilization beginning to
pulse with steam and electricity, where the sun paints
pictures and the phonograph stores speech, it will not do to
be merely as just as were our fathers. Intellectual advance
and material advance require corresponding moral advance.
Knowledge and power are neither good nor evil. They are not
ends but means---evolving forces that if not controlled in
orderly relations must take disorderly and destructive
forms. The deepening pain, the increasing perplexity, the
growing discontent for which, as you truly say, *some remedy
must be found and quickly found,* mean nothing less than
that forces of destruction swifter and more terrible than
those that have shattered every preceding civilization are
already menacing ours---that if it does not quickly rise to
a higher moral level; if it does not become in deed as in
word a Christian civilization, on the wall of its splendor
must flame the doom of Babylon: "Thou art weighed in the
balance and found wanting!"

One false assumption prevents you from seeing the real cause
and true significance of the facts that have prompted your
Encyclical. And it fatally fetters you when you seek a
remedy.

You state that you approach the subject with confidence, yet
in all that greater part of the Encyclical (19-67) devoted
to the remedy, while there is an abundance of moral
reflections and injunctions, excellent in themselves but
dead and meaningless as you apply them, the only definite
practical proposals for the improvement of the condition of
labor are:

1.  That the State should step in to prevent overwork, to
    restrict the employment of women and children, to secure
    in workshops conditions not unfavorable to health and
    morals, and, at least where there is danger of
    insufficient wages provoking strikes, to regulate wages
    (39-40).

2.  That it should encourage the acquisition of property (in
    land) by workingmen (50-51).

3.  That workingmen's associations should be formed (52-67).

These remedies so far as they .go are socialistic, and
though the Encyclical is not without recognition of the
individual character of man and of the priority of the
individual and the family to the state, yet the whole
tendency and spirit of its remedial suggestions lean
unmistakably to socialism---extremely moderate socialism it
is true; socialism hampered and emasculated by a supreme
respect for private possessions; yet socialism still. But,
although you frequently use the ambiguous term "private
property" when the context shows that you have in mind
private property in land, the one thing clear on the surface
and becoming clearer still with examination is that you
insist that whatever else may be done, the private ownership
of land shall be left untouched.

I have already referred generally to the defects that attach
to all socialistic remedies for the evil condition of labor,
but respect for your Holiness dictates that I should speak
specifically, even though briefly, of the remedies proposed
or suggested by you.

Of these, the widest and strongest are that the state should
restrict the hours of labor, the employment of women and
children, the unsanitary conditions of workshops, etc. Yet
how little may in this way be accomplished.

A strong, absolute ruler might hope by such regulations to
alleviate the conditions of chattel slaves. But the tendency
of our times is towards democracy, and democratic states are
necessarily weaker in paternalism, while in the industrial
slavery, growing out of private ownership of land, that
prevails in Christendom to-day, it is not the master who
forces the slave to labor, but the\* slave who urges the
master to let him labor. Thus the greatest difficulty in
enforcing such regulations comes from those whom they are
intended to benefit. It is not, for instance, the masters
who make it difficult to enforce restrictions on child labor
in factories, but the mothers, who, prompted by poverty,
misrepresent the ages of their children even to the masters,
and teach the children to misrepresent.

But while in large factories and mines regulations as to
hours, ages, etc., though subject to evasion and offering
opportunities for extortion and corruption, may be to some
extent enforced, how can they have any effect in those far
wider branches of industry where the laborer works for
himself or for small employers?

All such remedies are of the nature of the remedy for
overcrowding that is generally prescribed with them---the
restriction under penalty of the number who may occupy a
room and the demolition of unsanitary buildings. Since these
measures have no tendency to increase house accommodation or
to augment ability to pay for it, the overcrowding that is
forced back in some places goes on in other places and to a
worse degree. All such remedies begin at the wrong end. They
are like putting on brake and bit to hold in quietness
horses that are being lashed into frenzy; they are like
trying to stop a locomotive by holding its wheels instead of
shutting off steam; like attempting to cure smallpox by
driving back its pustules. Men do not overwork themselves
because they like it; it is not in the nature of the
mother's heart to send children to work when they ought to
be at play; it is not of choice that laborers will work in
dangerous and unsanitary conditions. These things, like
overcrowding, come from the sting of poverty. And so long as
the poverty of which they are the expression is left
untouched, restrictions such as you endorse can have only
partial and evanescent results. The cause remaining,
repression in one place can only bring out its effects in
other places, and the task you assign to the state is as
hopeless as to ask it to lower the level of the ocean by
bailing out the sea.

Nor can the state cure poverty by regulating wages. It is as
much beyond the power of the state to regulate wages as it
is to regulate the rates of interest. Usury laws have been
tried again and again, but the only effect they have ever
had has been to increase what the poorer borrowers must pay,
and for the same reasons that all attempts to lower by
regulation the price of goods have always resulted merely in
increasing them. The general rate of wages is fixed by the
ease or difficulty with which labor can obtain access to
land, ranging from the full earnings of labor, where land is
free, to the least on which laborers can live and reproduce,
where land is fully monopolized. Thus, where it has been
comparatively easy for laborers to get land, as in the
United States and in Australasia, wages have been higher
than in Europe and it has been impossible to get European
laborers to work there for wages that they would gladly
accept at home; while as monopolization goes on under the
influence of private property in land, wages tend to fall,
and the social conditions of Europe to appear. Thus, under
the partial yet substantial recognition of common rights to
land, of which I have spoken, the many attempts of the
British parliaments to reduce wages by regulation failed
utterly. And so, when the institution of private property in
land had done its work in England, all attempts of
Parliament to raise wages proved unavailing. In the
beginning of this century it was even attempted to increase
the earnings of laborers by grants in aid of wages. But the
only result was to lower commensurately what wages employers
paid.

The state could only maintain wages above the tendency of
the market (for as I have shown labor deprived of land
becomes a commodity), by offering employment to all who wish
it; or by lending its sanction to strikes and supporting
them with its funds. Thus it is, that the thorough -going
socialists who want the state to take all industry into its
hands are much more logical than those timid socialists who
propose that the state should regulate private
industry---but only a little.

The same hopelessness attends your suggestion that working
people should be encouraged by the state in obtaining a
share of the land. It is evident that by this you mean that,
as is now being attempted in Ireland, the state shall buy
out large land owners in favor of small ones, establishing
what is known as peasant proprietors. Supposing that this
can be done even to a considerable extent, what will be
accomplished save to substitute a larger privileged class
for a smaller privileged class? What will be done for the
still larger class that must remain, the laborers of the
agricultural districts, the workmen of the towns, the
proletarians of the cities? Is it not true, as Professor De
Laveleye says, that in such countries as Belgium, where
peasant proprietary exists, the tenants, for there still
exist tenants, are rackrented with a mercilessness unknown
in Ireland? Is it not true that in such countries as Belgium
the condition of the mere laborer is even worse than it is
in Great Britain, where large ownerships obtain? And if the
state attempts to buy up land for peasant proprietors will
not the effect be, what is seen to-day in Ireland, to
increase the market value of land and thus make it more
difficult for those not so favored, and for those who will
come after, to get land? How, moreover, on the principle
which you declare (36), that " to the state the interests of
all are equal, whether high or low," will you justify state
aid to one man to buy a bit of land without also insisting
on state aid to another man to buy a donkey, to another to
buy a shop, to another to buy the tools and materials of a
trade---state aid in short to everybody who may be able to
make good use of it or thinks that he could? And are you not
thus landed in communism---not the communism of the early
Christians and of the religious orders, but communism that
uses the coercive power of the state to take rightful
property by force from those who have, to give to those who
have not? For the state has no purse of Fortunatus; the
state cannot repeat the miracle of the loaves and fishes;
all that the state can give, it must get by some form or
other of the taxing power. And whether it gives or lends
money, or gives or lends credit, it cannot give to those who
have not, without taking from those who have.

But aside from all this, any scheme of dividing up land
while maintaining private property in land is futile. Small
holdings cannot co-exist with the treatment of land as
private property where civilization is materially advancing
and wealth augments. We may see this in the economic
tendencies that in ancient times were the main cause that
transformed world-conquering Italy from a land of small
farms to a land of great estates. We may see it in the fact
that while two centuries ago the majority of English farmers
were' owners of the land they tilled, tenancy has been for a
long time the all but universal condition of the English
farmer. And now the mighty forces of steam and electricity
have come to urge concentration. It is in the United States
that we may see on the largest scale how their power is
operating to turn a nation of land owners into a nation of
tenants. The principle is clear and irresistible. Material
progress makes land more valuable, and when this increasing
value is left to private owners land must pass from the
ownership of the poor into the ownership of the rich, just
as diamonds so pass when poor men find them. What the
British government is attempting in Ireland is to build snow
houses in the Arabian desert! to plant bananas in Labrador!

There is one way, and only one way, in which working people
in our civilization may be secured a share in the land of
their country, and that is the way that we propose---the
taking of the profits of land ownership for the community.

As to workingmen's associations, what your Holiness seems to
contemplate is the formation and encouragement of societies
akin to the Catholic sodalities, and to the friendly and
beneficial societies, like the Odd Fellows, which have had a
large extension in English speaking countries. Such
associations may promote fraternity, extend social
intercourse and provide assurance in case of sickness or
death, but if they go no further they are powerless to
affect wages even among their members. As to trades unions
proper, it is hard to define your position, which is,
perhaps, best stated as one of warm approbation provided
that they do not go too far. For while you object to
strikes; while you reprehend societies that "do their best
to get into their hands the whole field of labor and to
force workingmen either to join them or to starve;" while
you discountenance the coercing of employers and seem to
think that arbitration might take the place of strikes; yet
you use expressions and assert principles that are all that
the trade unionist would ask, not merely to justify the
strike and the boycott, but even the use of violence where
only violence would suffice. For you speak of the
insufficient wages of workmen as due to the greed of rich
employers; you assume the moral right of the workman to
obtain employment from others at wages greater than those
others are willing freely to give; and you deny the right of
any one to work for such wages as he pleases, in such a way
as to lead Mr. Stead, in so widely read a journal as the
*Review of Reviews,* to approvingly declare that you regard
"blacklegging," *i. e.*, the working for less than union
wages, as a crime.

To men conscious of bitter injustice, to men steeped in
poverty yet mocked by flaunting wealth, such words mean more
than I can think you realize.

When fire shall be cool and ice be warm, when armies shall
throw away lead and iron, to try conclusions by the pelting
of rose leaves, such labor associations as you are thinking
of may be possible. But not till then. For labor
associations can do nothing to raise wages but by force. It
may be force applied passively, or force applied actively,
or force held in reserve, but it must be force. They must
coerce or hold the power to coerce employers; they *must*
coerce those among their own members disposed to straggle;
they *must* do their best to get into their hands the whole
field of labor they seek to occupy and to force other
workingmen either to join them or to starve. Those who tell
you of trades unions bent on raising wages by moral suasion
alone are like those who would tell you of tigers who live
on oranges.

The condition of the masses to-day is that of men pressed
together in a hall where ingress is open and more are
constantly coming, but where the doors for egress are
closed. If forbidden to relieve the general pressure by
throwing open those doors, whose bars and bolts are private
property in land, they can only mitigate the pressure on
themselves by forcing back others, and the weakest must be
driven to the wall. This is the way of labor unions and
trade guilds. Even those amiable societies that you
recommend would in their efforts to find employment for
their own members necessarily displace others.

For even the philanthropy which, recognizing the evil of
trying to help labor by alms, seeks to help men to help
themselves by finding them work, becomes aggressive in the
blind and bitter struggle that private property in land
entails, and in helping one set of men injures others. Thus,
to minimize the bitter complaints of taking work from others
and lessening the wages of others in providing their own
beneficiaries with work and wages, benevolent societies are
forced to devices akin to the digging of holes and filling
them up again. Our American societies feel this difficulty,
General Booth encounters it in England, and the Catholic
societies which your Holiness recommends must find it, when
they are formed.

Your Holiness knows of, and I am sure honors, the princely
generosity of Baron Hirsch towards his suffering
co-religionists. But, as I write, the New York newspapers
contain accounts of an immense meeting held in Cooper Union,
in this city, on the evening of Friday, September 4, in
which a number of Hebrew trades unions protested in the
strongest manner against the loss of work and reduction of
wages that is being effected by Baron Hirsch's generosity in
bringing their own countrymen here and teaching them to
work. The resolution unanimously adopted at this great
meeting thus concludes:

"We now demand of Baron Hirsch himself that he release us
from his 'charity' and take back the millions, which,
instead of a blessing, have proved a curse and a source of
misery."

Nor does this show that the members of these Hebrew labor
unions---who are themselves immigrants of the same class as
those Baron Hirsch is striving to help, for in the next
generation they lose with us their distinctiveness--- are a
whit less generous than other men.

Labor associations of the nature of trade guilds or unions
are necessarily selfish; by the law of their being they must
fight for their own hand, regardless of who is hurt; they
ignore and must ignore the teaching of Christ that we should
do to others as we would have them do to us, which a true
political economy shows is the only way to the full
emancipation of the masses. They must do their best to
starve workmen who do not join them, they must by all means
in their power force back the "blackleg"---as the soldier in
battle must shoot down his mother's son if in the opposing
ranks. And who is the blackleg? A fellow creature seeking
work---a fellow creature in all probability more pressed and
starved than those who so bitterly denounce him, and often
with the hungry pleading faces of wife and child behind him.

And, in so far as they succeed, what is it that trades
guilds and unions do but to impose more restrictions on
natural rights; to create "trusts" in labor; to add to
privileged classes other somewhat privileged classes; and to
press the weaker closer to the wall?

I speak without prejudice against trades unions, of which
for years I was an active member. And in pointing out to
your Holiness that their principle is selfish and incapable
of large and permanent benefits, and that their methods
violate natural rights and work hardship and injustice, I am
only saying to you what, both in my books and by word of
mouth, I have said over and over again to them. Nor is what
I say capable of dispute. Intelligent trades unionists know
it, and the less intelligent vaguely feel it. And even those
of the classes of wealth and leisure who, as if to head off
the demand for natural rights, are preaching trades unionism
to working men, must needs admit it.

Your Holiness will remember the great London dock strike of
two years ago, which, with that of other influential men,
received the moral support of that Prince of the Church whom
we of the English speech hold higher and dearer than any
prelate has been held by us since the blood of Thomas
A'Becket stained the Canterbury altar.

In a volume called "The Story of the Dockers' Strike,"
written by Messrs. H. Lewellyn Smith and Vaughan Nash, with
an introduction by Sydney Buxton, M. P., which advocates
trades unionism as the solution of the labor question, and
of which a large number were sent to Australia as a sort of
official recognition of the generous aid received from there
by the strikers, I find in the summing up, on pages 164-5,
the following:

"If the settlement lasts, work at the docks will be more
regular, better paid, and carried on under better conditions
than ever before. All this will be an unqualified gain to
those who get the benefit from it. But another result will
undoubtedly be *to contract the field of employment and
lessen the number of those for whom work can be found.* The
lower class casual will, in the end, find his position more
precarious than ever before, in proportion to the increased
regularity of work which the"fitter" of the laborers will
secure. The effect of the organization of dock labor, as of
all classes of labor, will be *to squeeze out the residuum.*
The loafer, the cadger, the failure in the industrial
race---the members of 'Class B' of Mr. Charles Booth's
hierarchy of social classes---will be no gainers by the
change, but will rather *find another door closed against
them,* and this in many cases *the last door to
employments.*"

I am far from wishing that your Holiness should join in that
Pharisaical denunciation of trades unions common among those
who, while quick to point out the injustice of trades unions
in denying to others the equal right to work, are themselves
supporters of that more primary injustice that denies the
equal right to the standing place and natural material
necessary to work. What I wish to point out is that trades
unionism, while it may be a partial palliative, is not a
remedy; that it has not that moral character which could
alone justify one in the position of your Holiness in urging
it as good in itself. Yet, so long as you insist on private
property in land what better can you do?

# V

In the beginning of the Encyclical you declare that the
responsibility of the apostolic office urges your Holiness
to treat the question of the condition of labor "expressly
and at length in order that there may be no mistake as to
the principles which truth and justice dictate for its
settlement." But, blinded by one false assumption, you do
not see even fundamentals.

You assume that the labor question is a question between
wage-workers and their employers. But working for wages is
not the primary or exclusive occupation of labor. Primarily
men work for themselves without the intervention of an
employer. And the primary source of wages is in the earnings
of labor, the man who works for himself and consumes his own
products receiving his wages in the fruits of his labor. Are
not fishermen, boatmen, cab drivers, peddlers, working
farmers---all, in short, of the many workers who get their
wages directly by the sale of their services or products
without the medium of an employer, as much laborers as those
who work for the specific wages of an employer? In your
consideration of remedies you do not seem even to have
thought of them. Yet in reality the laborers who work for
themselves are the first to be considered, since what men
will be willing to accept from employers depends manifestly
on what they can get by working for themselves.

You assume that all employers are rich men, who might raise
wages much higher were they not so grasping. But is it not
the fact that the great majority of employers are in reality
as much pressed by competition as their workmen, many of
them constantly on the verge of failure? Such employers
could not possibly raise the wages they pay, however they
might wish to, unless all others were compelled to do so.

You assume that there are in the natural order two classes,
the rich and the poor, and that laborers naturally belong to
the poor.

It is true as you say that there are differences in
capacity, in diligence, in health and in strength, that may
produce differences in fortune. These, however, are not the
differences that divide men into rich and poor. The natural
differences in powers and aptitudes are certainly not
greater than are natural differences in stature. But while
it is only by selecting giants and dwarfs that we can find
men twice as tall as others, yet in the difference between
rich and poor that exists to-day we find some men richer
than other men by the thousand fold and the million fold.

Nowhere do these differences between wealth and poverty
coincide with differences in individual powers and
aptitudes. The real difference between rich and poor is the
difference between those who hold the toll gates and those
who pay toll; between tribute receivers and tribute yield
ers.

In what way does nature justify such a difference? In the
numberless varieties of animated nature we find some species
that are evidently intended to live on other species. But
their relations are always marked by unmistakable
differences in size, shape or organs. To man has been given
dominion over all the other living things that tenant the
earth. But is not this mastery indicated even in externals,
so that no one can fail on sight to distinguish between a
man and one of the inferior animals. Our American apologists
for slavery used to contend that the black skin and woolly
hair of the negro indicated the intent of nature that the
black should serve the white; but the difference that you
assume to be natural is between men of the same race. What
difference does nature show between such men as would
indicate her intent that one should live idly yet be rich,
and the other should work hard yet be poor? If I could bring
you from the United States a man who has \$200,000,000, and
one who is glad to work for a few dollars a week, and place
them side by side in your ante-chamber, would you be able to
tell which was which, even were you to call in the most
skilled anatomist? Is it not clear that God in no way
countenances or condones the division of rich and poor that
exists to-day, or in any way permits it, except as having
given them free will he permits men to choose either good or
evil, and to avoid heaven if they prefer hell. For is it not
clear that the division of men into the classes rich and
poor has invariably its origin in force and fraud;
invariably involves violation of the moral law; and is
really a division into those who get the profits of robbery
and those who are robbed; those who hold in exclusive
possession what God made for all, and those who are deprived
of His bounty? Did not Christ in all His utterances and
parables show that the gross difference between rich and
poor is opposed to God's law? Would he have condemned the
rich so strongly as he did, if the class distinction between
rich and poor did not involve injustice---was not opposed to
God's intent?

It seems to us that your Holiness misses its real
significance in intimating that Christ, in becoming the son
of a carpenter and Himself working as a carpenter, showed
merely that "there is nothing to be ashamed of in seeking
one's bread by labor." To say that is almost like saying
that by not robbing people He showed that there is nothing
to be ashamed of in honesty % If you will consider how true
in any large view is the classification of all men into
workingmen, beggars and thieves, you will see that it was
morally impossible that Christ during His stay on earth
should have been anything else than a working-man, since He
who came to fulfil the law must by deed as well as word obey
God's law of labor.

See how fully and how beautifully Christ's life on earth
illustrated this law. Entering our earthly life in the
weakness of infancy, as it is appointed that all should
enter it, He lovingly took what in the natural order is
lovingly rendered, the sustenance, secured by labor, that
one generation owes to its immediate successors. Arrived at
maturity, He earned His own subsistence by that common labor
in which the majority of men must and do earn it. Then
passing to a higher---to the very highest---sphere of labor,
He earned His subsistence by the teaching of moral and
spiritual truths, receiving its material wages in the love
offerings of grateful hearers, and not refusing the costly
spikenard with which Mary anointed His feet. So, when He
chose His disciples, He did not go to land owners or other
monopolists who live on the labor of others, but to common
laboring men. And when He called them to a higher sphere of
labor and sent them out to teach moral and spiritual truths,
He told them to take, without condescension on the one hand
or sense of degradation on the other, the loving return for
such labor, saying to them that the "laborer is worthy of
his hire," thus showing, what we hold, that all labor does
not consist in what is called manual labor, but that whoever
helps to add to the material, intellectual, moral or
spiritual fullness of life is also a laborer.

In assuming that laborers, even ordinary manual laborers,
are naturally poor, you ignore the fact that labor is the
producer of wealth, and attribute to the natural law of the
Creator an injustice that comes from man's impious violation
of His benevolent intention. In the rudest stage of the arts
it is possible, where justice prevails, for all well men to
earn a living. With the labor-saving appliances of our time,
it should be possible for all to earn much more. And so, in
saying that poverty is no disgrace, you convey an
unreasonable implication. For poverty *ought* to be a
disgrace, since in a condition of social justice, it would,
where unsought from religious motives or un-imposed by
unavoidable misfortune, imply recklessness or laziness.

The sympathy of your Holiness seems exclusively directed to
the poor, the workers. Ought this to be so? Are not the
rich, the idlers, to be pitied also? By the word of the
Gospel it is the rich rather than the poor who call for
pity, for the presumption is that they will share the fate
of Dives. And to any one who believes in a future life the
condition of him who wakes to find his cherished millions
left behind must seem pitiful. But even in this life, how
really pitiable are the rich. The evil is not in wealth in
itself---in its command over material things; it is in the
possession of wealth while others are steeped in poverty; in
being raised above touch with the life of humanity, from its
work and its struggles, its hopes and its fears, and above
all, from the love that sweetens life, and the kindly
sympathies and generous acts that strengthen faith in man
and trust in God. Consider how the rich see the meaner side
of human nature; how they are surrounded by flatterers and
sycophants; how they find ready instruments not only to
gratify vicious impulses, but to prompt and stimulate them;
how they must constantly be on guard lest they be swindled;
how often they must suspect an ulterior motive behind kindly
deed or friendly word; how if they try to be generous they
are beset by shameless beggars and scheming impostors; how
often the family affections are chilled for them, and their
deaths anticipated with the ill-concealed joy of expectant
possession. The worst evil of poverty is not in the want of
material things, but in the stunting and distortion of the
higher qualities. So, though in another way, the possession
of unearned wealth likewise stunts and distorts what is
noblest in man.

God's commands cannot be evaded with impunity. If it be
God's command that men shall earn their bread by labor, the
idle rich must suffer. And they do. See the utter vacancy of
the lives of those who live for pleasure; see the loathsome
vices bred in a class who surrounded by poverty are sated
with wealth. See that terrible punishment of *ennui*, of
which the poor know so little that they cannot understand
it; see the pessimism that grows among the wealthy
classes---that shuts out God, that despises men, that deems
existence in itself an evil, and fearing death yet longs for
annihilation.

When Christ told the rich young man who sought Him to sell
all he had and to give it to the poor, He was not thinking
of the poor, but of the young man. And I doubt not that
among the rich, and especially among the self-made rich,
there are many who at times at least feel keenly the folly
of their riches and fear for the dangers and temptations to
which these expose their children. But the strength of long
habit, the promptings of pride, the excitement of making and
holding what has become for them the counters in a game of
cards, the family expectations that have assumed the
character of rights, and the real difficulty they find in
making any good use of their wealth, bind them to their
burden, like a weary donkey to his pack, till they stumble
on the precipice that bounds this life.

Men who are sure of getting food when they shall need it eat
only what appetite dictates. But with the sparse tribes who
exist on the verge of the habitable globe life is either a
famine or a feast. Enduring hunger for days, the fear of it
prompts them to gorge like anacondas when successful in
their quest of game. And so, what gives wealth its curse is
what drives men to seek it, what makes it so envied and
admired---the fear of want. As the unduly rich are the
corollary of the unduly poor, so is the soul-destroying
quality of riches but the reflex of the want that embrutes
and degrades. The real evil lies in the injustice from which
unnatural possession and unnatural deprivation both spring.

But this injustice can hardly be charged on individuals or
classes. The existence of private property in land is a
great social wrong from which society at large suffers, and
of which the very rich and the very poor are alike victims,
though at the opposite extremes. Seeing this, it seems to us
like a violation of Christian charity to speak of the rich
as though they individually were responsible for the
sufferings of the poor. Yet, while you do this, you insist
that the cause of monstrous wealth and degrading poverty
shall not be touched. Here is a man with a disfiguring and
dangerous excrescence. One physician would kindly, gently,
but firmly remove it. Another insists that it shall not be
removed, but at the same time holds up the poor victim to
hatred and ridicule. Which is right?

In seeking to restore all men to their equal and natural
rights we do not seek the benefit of any class, but of all.
For we both know by faith and see by fact that injustice can
profit no one and that justice must benefit all.

Nor do we seek any "futile and ridiculous equality." We
recognize, with you, that there must always be differences
and inequalities. In so far as these are in conformity with
the moral law, in so far as they do not violate the command,
"Thou shalt not steal," we are content. We do not seek to
better God's work; we seek only to do His will. The equality
we would bring about is not the equality of fortune, but the
equality of natural opportunity; the equality that reason
and religion alike proclaim---the equality in usufruct of
all His children to the bounty of Our Father who art in
Heaven.

And in taking for the uses of society what we clearly see is
the great fund intended for society in the divine order, we
would not levy the slightest tax on the possessors of
wealth, no matter how rich they might be. Not only do we
deem such taxes a violation of the right of property, but we
see that by virtue of beautiful adaptations in the economic
laws of the Creator, it is impossible for any one honestly
to acquire wealth, without at the same time adding to the
wealth of the world.

To persist in a wrong, to refuse to undo it, is always to
become involved in other wrongs. Those who defend private
property in land, and thereby deny the first and most
important of all human rights, the equal right to the
material substratum of life, are compelled to one of two
courses. Either they must, as do those whose gospel is "
Devil take the hindermost," deny the equal right to life,
and by some theory like that to which the English clergyman
Malthus has given his name, assert that nature (they do not
venture to say God) brings into the world more men than
there is provision for; or, they must, as do the socialists,
assert as rights what in themselves are wrongs.

Your Holiness in the Encyclical gives an example of this.
Denying the equality of right to the material basis of life,
-and yet conscious that there is a right to live, you assert
the right of laborers to employment and their right to
receive from their employers a certain indefinite wage. No
such rights exist. No one has a right to demand employment
of another, or to demand higher wages than the other is
willing to give, or in any way to put pressure on another to
make him raise such wages against his will. There can be no
better moral justification for such demands on employers by
workingmen than there would be for employers demanding that
workingmen shall be compelled to work for them when they do
not want to and to accept wages lower than they are willing
to take. Any seeming justification springs from a prior
wrong, the denial to workingmen of their natural rights, and
can in the last analysis only rest on that supreme dictate
of self-preservation that under extraordinary circumstances
makes pardonable what in itself is theft, or sacrilege or
even murder.

A fugitive slave with the bloodhounds of his pursuers baying
at his heels would in true Christian morals be held
blameless if he seized the first horse he came across, even
though to take it he had to knock down the rider. But this
is not to justify horse-stealing as an ordinary means of
traveling.

When his disciples were hungry Christ permitted them to
pluck corn on the Sabbath day. But He never denied the
sanctity of the Sabbath by asserting that it was under
ordinary circumstances a proper time to gather corn.

He justified David, who when pressed by hunger committed
what ordinarily would be sacrilege, by taking from the
temple the loaves of proposition. But in this He was far
from saying that the robbing of temples was a proper way of
getting a living.

In the Encyclical however you commend the application to the
ordinary relations of life, under normal conditions, of
principles that in ethics are only to be tolerated under
extraordinary conditions. You are driven to this assertion
of false rights by your denial of true rights. The natural
right which each man has is not that of demanding employment
or wages from another man; but that of employing
himself---that of applying by his own labor to the
inexhaustible storehouse which the Creator has in the land
provided for all men. Were that storehouse open, as by the
single tax we would open it, the natural demand for labor
would keep pace with the supply, the man who sold labor and
the man who bought it would become free exchangers for
mutual advantage, and all cause for dispute between workman
and employer would be gone. For then, all being free to
employ themselves, the mere opportunity to labor would cease
to seem a boon; and since no one would work for another for
less, all things considered, than he could earn by working
for himself, wages would necessarily rise to their full
value, and the relations of workman and employer be
regulated by mutual interest and convenience.

This is the only way in which they can be satisfactorily
regulated.

Your Holiness seems to assume that there is some just rate
of wages that employers ought to be willing to pay and that
laborers should be content to receive, and to imagine that
if this were secured there would be an end of strife. This
rate you evidently think of as that which will give
workingmen a frugal living, and perhaps enable them by hard
work and strict economy to lay by a little something.

But how can a just rate of wages be fixed without the
"higgling of the market" any more than the just price of
corn or pigs or ships or paintings can be so fixed? And
would not arbitrary regulation in the one case as in the
other check that interplay that most effectively promotes
the economical adjustment of productive forces? Why should
buyers of labor, any more than buyers of commodities, be
called on to pay higher prices than in a free market they
are compelled to pay? Why should the sellers of labor be
content with anything less than in a free market they can
obtain? Why should workingmen be content with frugal fare
when the world is so rich? Why should they be satisfied with
a life time of toil and stinting, when the world is so
beautiful % Why should not they also desire to gratify the
higher instincts, the finer tastes? Why should they be
forever content to travel in the steerage when others find
the cabin more enjoyable?

Nor will they. The ferment of our time does not arise merely
from the fact that workingmen find it harder to live on the
same scale of comfort. It is also and perhaps still more
largely due to the increase of their desires with an
improved scale of comfort. This increase of desire must
continue. For workingmen are men. And man is the unsatisfied
animal.

He is not an ox, of whom it may be said, so much grass, so
much grain, so much water, and a little salt, and he will be
content. On the contrary, the more he gets the more he
craves. When he has enough food then he wants better food.
When he gets a shelter then he wants a more commodious and
tasty one. When his animal needs are satisfied then mental
and spiritual desires arise.

This restless discontent is of the nature of man---of that
nobler nature that raises him above the animals by so
immeasurable a gulf, and shows him to be indeed created in
the likeness of God. It is not to be quarrelled with, for it
is the motor of all progress. It is this that has raised
St. Peter's dome and on dull, dead canvass made the angelic
face of the Madonna to glow; it is this that has weighed
suns and analyzed stars, and opened page after page of the
wonderful works of creative intelligence; it is this that
has narrowed the Atlantic to an ocean ferry and trained the
lightning to carry our messages to the remotest lands; it is
this that is opening to us possibilities beside which all
that our modern civilization has as yet accomplished seem
small. Nor can it be repressed save by degrading and
imbruting men; by reducing Europe to Asia.

Hence, short of what wages may be earned when all
restrictions on labor are removed and access to natural
opportunities on equal terms secured to all, it is
impossible to fix any rate of wages that will be deemed
just, or any rate of wages that can prevent workingmen
striving to get more. So far from it making workingmen more
contented to improve their condition a little, it is certain
to make them more discontented.

Nor are you asking justice when you ask employers to pay
their workingmen more than they are compelled to pay---more
than they could get others to do the work for. You are
asking charity. For the surplus that the rich employer thus
gives is not in reality wages, it is essentially alms.

In speaking of the practical measures for the improvement of
the condition of labor which your Holiness suggests, I have
not mentioned what you place much stress upon---charity. But
there is nothing practical in such recommendations as a cure
for poverty, nor will any one so consider them. If it were
possible for the giving of alms to abolish poverty there
would be no poverty in Christendom.

Charity is indeed a noble and beautiful virtue, grateful to
man and approved by God. But charity must be built on
justice. It cannot supersede justice.

What is wrong with the condition of labor through the
Christian world is that labor is robbed. And while you
justify the continuance of that robbery it is idle to urge
charity. To do so---to commend charity as a substitute for
justice, is indeed something akin in essence to those
heresies, condemned by your predecessors, that taught that
the Gospel had superseded the law, and that the love of God
exempted men from moral obligations.

All that charity can do where injustice exists is here and
there to somewhat mollify the effects of injustice. It
cannot cure them. Nor is even what little it can do to
mollify the effects of injustice without evil. For what may
be called the superimposed, and in this sense, secondary
virtues, work evil where the fundamental or primary virtues
are absent. Thus sobriety is a virtue and diligence is a
virtue. But a sober and diligent thief is all the more
dangerous. Thus patience is a virtue. But patience under
wrong is the condoning of wrong. Thus it is a virtue to seek
knowledge and to endeavor to cultivate the mental powers.
But the wicked man becomes more capable of evil by reason of
his intelligence. Devils we always think of as intelligent.

And thus that pseudo charity that discards and denies
justice works evil. On the one side, it demoralizes its
recipients, outraging that human dignity which as you say
"God himself treats with reverence," and turning into
beggars and paupers men who to become self supporting, self
respecting citizens only need the restitution of what God
has given them. On the other side, it acts as an anodyne to
the consciences of those who are living on the robbery of
their fellows, and fosters that moral delusion and spiritual
pride that Christ doubtless had in mind when he said it was
easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than
for a rich man to enter the kingdom of Heaven. Tor it leads
men steeped in injustice, and using their money and their
influence to bolster up injustice, to think that in giving
alms they are doing something more than their duty towards
man and deserve to be very well thought of by God, and in a
vague way to attribute to their own goodness what really
belongs to God's goodness. For consider: Who is the
All-provider? Who is it the!: as you say, "owes to man a
storehouse that shall never fail," and which "he finds only
in the inexhaustible fertility of the earth." Is it not God?
And when, therefore, men, deprived of the bounty of their
God, are made dependent on the bounty of their fellow
creatures, are not these creatures, as it were, put in the
place of God, to take credit to themselves for paying
obligations that you yourself say God owes?

But worse perhaps than all else is the way in which this
substituting of vague injunctions to charity for the
clear-cut demands of justice opens an easy means for the
professed teachers of the Christian religion of all branches
and communions to placate Mammon while persuading themselves
that they are serving God. Had the English clergy not
subordinated the teaching of justice to the teaching of
charity---to go no further in illustrating a principle of
which the whole history of Christendom from Constantine's
time to our own is witness---the Tudor tyranny would never
have arisen, and the separation of the Church been averted;
had the clergy of France never substituted charity for
justice, the monstrous iniquities of the ancient regime
would never have brought the horrors of the Great
Revolution; and in my own country had those who should have
preached justice not satisfied themselves with preaching
kindness, chattel slavery could never have demanded the
holocaust of our civil war.

No, your Holiness; as faith without works is dead, as men
cannot give to God His due while denying to their fellows
the rights He gave them, so charity unsupported by justice
can do nothing to solve the problem of the existing
condition of labor. Though the rich were to " bestow all
their goods to feed the poor and give their bodies to be
burned," poverty would continue while property in land
continues.

Take the case of the rich man to-day who is honestly
desirous of devoting his wealth to the improvement of the
condition of labor. What can he do?

Bestow his wealth on those who need it? He may help some who
deserve it, but will not improve general conditions. And
against the good he may do will be the danger of doing harm.

Build churches? Under the shadow of churches poverty festers
and the vice that is born of it breeds.

Build schools and colleges? Save as it may lead men to see
the iniquity of private property in land, increased
education can effect nothing for mere laborers, for as
education is diffused the wages of education sink.

Establish hospitals? Why, already it seems to laborers that
there are too many seeking work, and to save and prolong
life is to add to the pressure.

Build model tenements? Unless he cheapens house
accommodations he but drives further the class he would
benefit, and as he cheapens house accommodation he brings
more to seek employment and cheapens wages.

Institute laboratories, scientific schools, workshops for
physical experiments? He but stimulates invention and
discovery, the very forces that, acting on a society based
on private property in land, are crushing labor as between
the upper and the nether millstone.

Promote emigration from places where wages are low to places
where they are somewhat higher? If he does, even those whom
he at first helps to emigrate will soon turn on him to
demand that such emigration shall be stopped as reducing
their wages.

Give away what land he may have, or refuse to take rent for
it, or let it at lower rents than the market price? He will
simply make new land owners or partial land owners; he may
make some individuals the richer, but he will do nothing to
improve the general condition of labor.

Or, bethinking himself of those public spirited citizens of
classic times who spent great sums in improving their native
cities, shall he try to beautify the city of his birth or
adoption? Let him widen and straighten narrow and crooked
streets, let him build parks and erect fountains, let him
open tramways and bring in railroads, or in any way make
beautiful and attractive his chosen city, and what will be
the result? Must it not be that those who appropriate God's
bounty will take his also? Will it not be that the value of
land will go up, and that the net result of his benefactions
will be an increase of rents and a bounty to land owners?
Why, even the mere announcement that he is going to do such
things will start speculation and send up the value of land
by leaps and bounds.

What, then, can the rich man do to improve the condition of
labor?

He can do nothing at all except to use his strength for the
abolition of the great primary wrong that robs men of their
birthright. The justice of God laughs at the attempts of men
to substitute anything else for it.

If when in speaking of the practical measures your Holiness
proposes, I did not note the moral injunctions that the
Encyclical contains, it is not because we do not think
morality practical. On the contrary it seems to us that in
the teachings of morality is to be found the highest
practicality, and that the question, What is wise? may
always safely be subordinated to the question, What is
right? But your Holiness in the Encyclical expressly
deprives the moral truths you state of all real bearing on
the condition of labor, just as the American people, by
their legalization of chattel slavery, used to deprive of
all practical meaning the declaration they deem their
fundamental charter, and were accustomed to read solemnly on
every national anniversary. That declaration asserts that
"We hold these truths to be self evident that all men are
created equal and are endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and
the pursuit of happiness." But what did this truth mean on
the lips of men who asserted that one man was the rightful
property of another man who had bought him; who asserted
that the slave was robbing the master in running away, and
that the man or the woman who helped the fugitive to escape,
or even gave him a cup of cold water in Christ's name, was
an accessory to theft, on whose head the penalties of the
state should be visited?

Consider the moral teachings of the Encyclical:

You tell us that God owes to man an inexhaustible storehouse
which he finds only in the land. Yet you support a system
that denies to the great majority of men all right of
recourse to this storehouse.

You tell us that the necessity of labor is a consequence of
original sin. Yet you support a system that exempts a
privileged class from the necessity for labor and enables
them to shift their share and much more than their share of
labor on others.

You tell us that God has not created us for the perishable
and transitory things of earth, but has given us this world
as a place of exile and not as our true country. Yet you
tell us that some of the exiles have the exclusive right of
ownership in this place of common exile, so that they may
compel their fellow exiles to pay *them* for sojourning
here, and that this exclusive ownership they may transfer to
other exiles yet to come, with the same right of excluding
their fellows.

You tell us that virtue is the common inheritance of all;
that all men are children of God the common Father; that all
have the same last end; that all are redeemed by Jesus
Christ; that the blessings of nature and the gifts of grace
belong in common to all, and that to all except the unworthy
is promised the inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven! Yet in
all this and through all this you insist as a moral duty on
the maintenance of a system that makes the reservoir of all
God's material bounties and blessings to man the exclusive
property of a few of their number---you give us equal rights
in heaven, but deny us equal rights on earth!

It was said of a famous decision of the Supreme Court of the
United States made just before the civil war, in a fugitive
slave case, that "it gave the law to the North and the
nigger to the South." It is thus that your Encyclical gives
the gospel to laborers and the earth to the landlords. Is it
really to be wondered at that there are those who sneeringly
say "The priests are ready enough to give the poor an equal
share in all that is out of sight, but they take precious
good care that the rich shall keep a tight grip on all that
is within sight."

Herein is the reason why the working masses all over the
world are turning away from organized religion.

And why should they not? What is the office of religion if
not to point out the principles that ought to govern the
conduct of men towards each other; to furnish a clear,
decisive rule of right which shall guide men in all the
relations of life---in the workshop, in the mart, in the
forum and in the senate, as well as in the church; to
supply, as it were, a compass by which amid the blasts of
passion, the aberrations of greed and the delusions of a
short-sighted expediency men may safely steer? What is the
use of a religion that stands palsied and paltering in the
face of the most momentous problems? What is the use of a
religion that whatever it may promise for the next world can
do nothing to prevent injustice in this? Early Christianity
was not such a religion, else it would never have
encountered the Roman persecutions; else it would never have
swept the Roman world. The sceptical masters of Rome,
tolerant of all gods, careless of what they deemed vulgar
superstitions, were keenly sensitive to a doctrine based on
equal rights; they feared instinctively a religion that
inspired slave and proletarian with a new hope; that took
for its central figure a crucified carpenter; that taught
the equal fatherhood of God and the equal brotherhood of
men; that looked for the speedy reign of justice, and that
prayed, *"Thy Kingdom come on Earth!"*

To-day, the same perceptions, the same aspirations, exist
among the masses. Man is, as he has been called, a religious
animal, and can never quite rid himself of the feeling that
there is some moral government of the world, some eternal
distinction between wrong and right; can never quite abandon
the yearning for a reign of righteousness. And to-day, men
who, as they think, have cast off all belief in religion,
will tell you, even though they know not what it is, that
with regard to the condition of labor something is wrong! If
theology be, as St. Thomas Aquinas held it, the sum and
focus of the sciences, is it not the business of religion to
say clearly and fearlessly what that wrong is? It was by a
deep impulse that of old when threatened and perplexed by
general disaster men came to the oracles to ask, In what
have we offended the gods? To-day,menaced by growing evils
that threaten the very existence of society, men, conscious
that *something is wrong,* are putting the same question to
the ministers of religion. What is the answer they get?
Alas, with few exceptions, it is as vague, as inadequate, as
the answers that used to come from heathen oracles.

Is it any wonder that the masses of men are losing faith?

Let me again state the case that your Encyclical presents:

What is that condition of labor which as you truly say is
"the question of the hour," and "fills every mind with
painful apprehension?" Reduced to its lowest expression it
is the poverty of men willing to work. And what is the
lowest expression of this phrase? It is that they lack
bread---for in that one word we most concisely and strongly
express all the manifold material satisfactions needed by
humanity, the absence of which constitutes poverty.

Now what is the prayer of Christendom---the universal
prayer; the prayer that goes up daily and hourly wherever
the name of Christ is honored; that ascends from your
Holiness at the high altar of St. Peter's, and that is
repeated by the youngest child that the poorest Christian
mother has taught to lisp a request to her Father in Heaven?
It is, "Give us this day our daily bread!"

Yet where this prayer goes up, daily and hourly, men lack
bread. Is it not the business of religion to say why? If it
cannot do so, shall not scoffers mock its ministers as Elias
mocked the prophets of Baal, saying, "Cry with a louder
voice, for he is a god; and perhaps he is talking, or is in
an inn, or on a journey or perhaps he is asleep, and must be
awakened!" What answer can those ministers give? Either
there is no God, or He is asleep, or else He does give men
their daily bread, and it is in some way intercepted.

Here is the answer, the only true answer: If men lack bread
it is not that God has not done His part in providing it. If
men willing to labor are cursed with poverty, it is not that
the storehouse that God owes men has failed; that the daily
supply He has promised for the daily wants of His children
is not here in abundance. It is, that impiously violating
the benevolent intentions of their Creator, men have made
land private property, and thus given into the exclusive
ownership of the few the provision that a bountiful Father
has made for all.

Any other answer than that, no matter how it may be shrouded
in the mere forms of religion, is practically an atheistic
answer.

\*\*\*

I have written this letter not alone for your Holiness, but
for all whom I may hope it to reach. But in sending it to
you personally, and in advance of publication, I trust that
it may be by you personally read and weighed. In setting
forth the grounds of our belief and in pointing out
considerations which it seems to us you have unfortunately
overlooked, I have written frankly, as was my duty on a
matter of such momentous importance, and as I am sure you
would have me write. But I trust I have done so without
offence. For your office I have profound respect, for
yourself personally the highest esteem. And while the views
I have opposed seem to us erroneous and dangerous, we do not
wish to be understood as in the slightest degree questioning
either your sincerity or intelligence in adopting them. For
they are views all but universally held by the professed
religious teachers of Christendom, in all communions and
creeds, and that have received the sanction of those looked
to as the wise and learned. Under the conditions that have
surrounded you, and under the pressure of so many high
duties and responsibilities, culminating in those of your
present exalted position, it is not to be expected that you
should have hitherto thought to question them. But I trust
that the considerations herein set forth may induce you to
do so, and even if the burdens and cares that beset you
shall now make impossible the careful consideration that
should precede expression by one in your responsible
position I trust that what I have written may not be without
use to others.

And, as I have said, we are deeply grateful for your
Encyclical. It is much that by so conspicuously calling
attention to the condition of labor, you have recalled the
fact forgotten by so many that the social evils and problems
of our time directly and pressingly concern the Church. It
is much that you should thus have placed the stamp of your
disapproval on that impious doctrine which directly and by
implication has been so long and so widely preached in the
name of Christianity, that the sufferings of the poor are
due to mysterious decrees of Providence which men may lament
but cannot alter. Your Encyclical will be seen by those who
carefully analyze it to be directed not against socialism,
which in moderate form you favor, but against what we in the
United States call the single tax. Yet we have no solicitude
for the truth save that it shall be brought into discussion,
and we recognize in your Holiness' Encyclical a most
efficient means of promoting discussion, and of promoting
discussion along the lines that we deem of the greatest
importance---the lines of morality and religion. In this you
deserve the gratitude of all who would follow truth, for it
is of the nature of truth always to prevail over error where
discussion goes on.

And the truth for which we stand has now made such progress
in the minds of men that it must be heard; that it can never
be stifled; that it must go on conquering and to conquer.
Far off Australia leads the van, and has already taken the
first steps towards the single tax. In Great Britain, in the
United States, and in Canada, the question is on the verge
of practical politics and soon will be the burning issue of
the time. Continental Europe cannot long linger behind.
Faster than ever the world is moving.

Forty years ago slavery seemed stronger in the United States
than ever before, and the market price of slaves---both
working slaves and breeding slaves---was higher than it had
ever been before, for the title of the owner seemed growing
more secure. In the shadow of the Hall where the equal
rights of man had been solemnly proclaimed, the manacled
fugitive was dragged back to bondage, and on what to
American tradition was our Marathon of freedom, the slave
master boasted that he would yet call the roll of his
chattels.

Yet forty years ago, though the party that was to place
Abraham Lincoln in the Presidential chair had not been
formed, and nearly a decade was yet to pass ere the signal
gun was to ring out, slavery, as we may now see, was doomed.

To-day a wider, deeper, more beneficent revolution is
brooding, not over one country, but over the world. God's
truth impels it, and forces mightier than He has ever before
given to man urge it on. It is no more in the power of
vested wrongs to stay it than it is in man's power to stay
the sun. The stars in their courses fight against Sisera,
and in the ferment of today, to him who hath ears to hear,
the doom of industrial slavery is sealed.

Where shall the dignitaries of the Church be in the struggle
that is coming, nay that is already here? On the side of
justice and liberty, or on the side of wrong and slavery %
with the delivered when the timbrels shall sound again, or
with the chariots and the horsemen that again shall be
engulfed in the sea?

As to the masses, there is little fear where they will be.
Already, among those who hold it with religious fervor, the
single tax counts great numbers of Catholics, many priests,
secular and regular, and at least some bishops, while there
is no communion or denomination of the many into which
English speaking Christians are divided where its advocates
are not to be found.

Last Sunday evening in the New York church that of all
churches in the world is most richly endowed, I saw the
cross carried through its aisles by a hundred choristers,
and heard a priest of that English branch of the Church that
three hundred years since was separated from your obedience,
declare to a great congregation that the labor question was
at bottom a religious question; that it. could only be
settled on the basis of moral right; that the first and
clearest of rights is the equal right to the use of the
physical basis of all life; and that no human titles could
set aside God's gift of the land to all men.

And as the Cross moved by, and the choristers sang,

>  "Raise ye the Christian's war-cry---
>
> The Cross of Christ the Lord!"

men to whom it was a new thing bowed their heads, and in
hearts long steeled against the Church, as the willing
handmaid of oppression, rose the "God wills it!" of the
grandest and mightiest of crusades.

Servant of the Servants of God! I call you by the strongest
and sweetest of your titles. In your hands more than in
those of any living man lies the power to say the word and
make the sign that shall end an unnatural divorce, and marry
again to religion all that is pure and high in social
aspiration

Wishing for your Holiness the chief est of all blessings,
that you may know the truth and be freed by the truth;
wishing for you the days and the strength that may enable
you by the great service you may render to humanity to make
your pontificate through all coming time most glorious; and
with the profound respect due to your personal character and
to your exalted office, I am,

Yours sincerely,

Henry George.

New York, September 11, 1891.

# Encyclical Letter of Pope Leo XIII on The Condition of Labor (Rerum Novarum)

*Official Translation.*

*To our Venerable Brethren, all Patriarchs, Primates,
Archbishops, and Bishops of the Catholic World, in grace and
communion with the Apostolic See, Pope Leo XIII.*

**Venerable Brethren, Health and Apostolic Benediction.**

1.  That the spirit of revolutionary change, which has long
    been disturbing the nations of the world,should have
    passed beyond the sphere of politics and made its
    influence felt in the cognate sphere of practical
    economics is not surprising. The elements of the
    conflict now raging are unmistakable, in the vast
    expansion of industrial pursuits and the marvellous
    discoveries of science; in the changed relations between
    masters and workmen; in the enormous fortunes of some
    few individuals,and the utter poverty of the masses; the
    increased self reliance and closer mutual combination of
    the working classes; as also, finally, in the prevailing
    moral degeneracy. The momentous gravity of the state of
    things now obtaining fills every mind with painful
    apprehension; wise men are discussing it; practical men
    are proposing schemes; popular meetings, legislatures,
    and rulers of nations are all busied with it---actually
    there is no question which has taken deeper hold on the
    public mind.

2.  Therefore, venerable brethren, as on former occasions
    when it seemed opportune to refute false teaching, We
    have addressed you in the interests of the Church and of
    the common weal, and have issued letters bearing on
    political power, human liberty, the Christian
    constitution of the State, and like matters, so have We
    thought it expedient now to speak on the condition of
    the working classes. It is a subject on which We have
    already touched more than once, incidentally. But in the
    present letter, the responsibility of the apostolic
    office urges Us to treat the question of set purpose and
    in detail, in order that no misapprehension may exist as
    to the principles which truth and justice dictate for
    its settlement. The discussion is not easy, nor is it
    void of danger. It is no easy matter to define the
    relative rights and mutual duties of the rich and of the
    poor, of capital and of labor. And the danger lies in
    this, that crafty agitators are intent on making use of
    these differences of opinion to pervert men's judgments
    and to stir up the people to revolt.

3.  In any case we clearly see, and on this there is general
    agreement, that some opportune remedy must be found
    quickly for the misery and wretchedness pressing so
    unjustly on the majority of the working class: for the
    ancient workingmen's guilds were abolished in the last
    century, and no other protective organization took their
    place. Public institutions and the laws set aside the
    ancient religion. Hence, by degrees it has come to pass
    that working men have been surrendered, isolated and
    helpless, to the hard-heartedness of employers and the
    greed of unchecked competition. The mischief has been
    increased by rapacious usury, which, although more than
    once condemned by the Church, is nevertheless, under a
    different guise, but with like injustice, still
    practiced by covetous and grasping men. To this must be
    added that the hiring of labor and the conduct of trade
    are concentrated in the hands of comparatively few; so
    that a small number of very rich men have been able to
    lay upon the teeming masses of the laboring poor a yoke
    little better than that of slavery itself.

4.  To remedy these wrongs the &, working on the poor man's
    envy of the rich, are striving to do away with private
    property, and contend that individual possessions should
    become the common property of all, to be administered by
    the State or by municipal bodies. They hold that by thus
    transferring property from private individuals to the
    community, the present mischievous state of things will
    be set to rights, inasmuch as each citizen will then get
    his fair share of whatever there is to enjoy. But their
    contentions are so clearly powerless to end the
    controversy that were they carried into effect the
    working man himself would be among the first to suffer.
    They are, moreover, emphatically unjust, for they would
    rob the lawful possessor, distort the functions of the
    State, and create utter confusion in the community.

5.  It is surely undeniable that, when a man engages in
    remunerative labor, the impelling reason and motive of
    his work is to obtain property, and thereafter to hold
    it as his very own. If one man hires out to another his
    strength or skill, he does so for the purpose of
    receiving in return what is necessary for the
    satisfaction of his needs; he therefore expressly
    intends to acquire a right full and real, not only to
    the remuneration, but also to the disposal of such
    remuneration, just as he pleases. Thus, if he lives
    sparingly, saves money, and, for greater security,
    invests his savings in land, the land, in such case, is
    only his wages under another form; and, consequently, a
    working man's little estate thus purchased should be as
    completely at his full disposal as are the wages he
    receives for his labor. But it is precisely in such
    power of disposal that ownership obtains, whether the
    property consist of land or chattels. Socialists,
    therefore, by endeavoring to transfer the possessions of
    individuals to the community at large, strike at the
    interests of every wage-earner, since they would deprive
    him of the liberty of disposing of his wages, and
    thereby of all hope and possibility of increasing his
    resources and of bettering his condition in life.

6.  What is of far greater moment, however, is the fact that
    the remedy they propose is manifestly against justice.
    For, every man has by nature the right to possess
    property as his own. This is one of the chief points of
    distinction between man and the animal creation, for the
    brute has no power of self direction, but is governed by
    two main instincts, which keep his powers on the alert,
    impel him to develop them in a fitting manner, and
    stimulate and determine him to action without any power
    of choice. One of these instincts is self preservation,
    the other the propagation of the species. Both can
    attain their purpose by means of things which lie within
    range; beyond their verge the brute creation cannot go,
    for they are moved to action by their senses only, and
    in the special direction which these suggest. But with
    man it is wholly different. He possesses, on the one
    hand, the full perfection of the animal being, and hence
    enjoys at least as much as the rest of the animal kind,
    the fruition of things material. But animal nature,
    however perfect, is far from representing the human
    being in its completeness, and is in truth but
    humanity's humble handmaid, made to serve and to obey.
    It is the mind, or reason, which is the predominant
    element in us who are human creatures; it is this which
    renders a human being human, and distinguishes him
    essentially from the brute. And on this very
    account---that man alone among the animal creation is
    endowed with reason---it must be within his right to
    possess things not merely for temporary and momentary
    use, as other living things do, but to have and to hold
    them in stable and permanent possession; he must have
    not only things that perish in the use, but those also
    which, though they have been reduced into use, continue
    for further use in after time.

7.  This becomes still more clearly evident if man's nature
    be considered a little more deeply. For man, fathoming
    by his faculty of reason matters without number, linking
    the future with the present, and being master of his own
    acts, guides his ways under the eternal law and the
    power of God, whose providence governs all things.
    Wherefore, it is in his power to exercise his choice not
    only as to matters that regard his present welfare, but
    also about those which he deems may be for his advantage
    in time yet to come. Hence, man not only should possess
    the fruits of the earth, but also the very soil,
    inasmuch as from the produce of the earth he has to lay
    by provision for the future. Man's needs do not die out,
    but forever recur; although satisfied today, they demand
    fresh supplies for tomorrow. Nature accordingly must
    have given to man a source that is stable and remaining
    always with him, from which he might look to draw
    continual supplies. And this stable condition of things
    he finds solely in the earth and its fruits. There is no
    need to bring in the State. Man precedes the State, and
    possesses, prior to the formation of any State, the
    right of providing for the substance of his body.

8.  The fact that God has given the earth for the use and
    enjoyment of the whole human race can in no way be a bar
    to the owning of private property. For God has granted
    the earth to mankind in general, not in the sense that
    all without distinction can deal with it as they like,
    but rather that no part of it was assigned to any one in
    particular, and that the limits of private possession
    have been left to be fixed by man's own industry, and by
    the laws of individual races. Moreover, the earth, even
    though apportioned among private owners, ceases not
    thereby to minister to the needs of all, inasmuch as
    there is not one who does not sustain life from what the
    land produces. Those who do not possess the soil
    contribute their labor; hence, it may truly be said that
    all human subsistence is derived either from labor on
    one's own land, or from some toil, some calling, which
    is paid for either in the produce of the land itself, or
    in that which is exchanged for what the land brings
    forth.

9.  Here, again, we have further proof that private
    ownership is in accordance with the law of nature.
    Truly, that which is required for the preservation of
    life, and for life's well-being, is produced in great
    abundance from the soil, but not until man has brought
    it into cultivation and expended upon it his solicitude
    and skill. Now, when man thus turns the activity of his
    mind and the strength of his body toward procuring the
    fruits of nature, by such act he makes his own that
    portion of nature's field which he cultivates---that
    portion on which he leaves, as it were, the impress of
    his personality; and it cannot but be just that he
    should possess that portion as his very own, and have a
    right to hold it without any one being justified in
    violating that right.

10. So strong and convincing are these arguments that it
    seems amazing that some should now be setting up anew
    certain obsolete opinions in opposition to what is here
    laid down. They assert that it is right for private
    persons to have the use of the soil and its various
    fruits, but that it is unjust for any one to possess
    outright either the land on which he has built or the
    estate which he has brought under cultivation. But those
    who deny these rights do not perceive that they are
    defrauding man of what his own labor has produced. For
    the soil which is tilled and cultivated with toil and
    skill utterly changes its condition; it was wild before,
    now it is fruitful; was barren, but now brings forth in
    abundance. That which has thus altered and improved the
    land becomes so truly part of itself as to be in great
    measure indistinguishable and inseparable from it. Is it
    just that the fruit of a man's own sweat and labor
    should be possessed and enjoyed by any one else? As
    effects follow their cause, so is it just and right that
    the results of labor should belong to those who have
    bestowed their labor.

11. With reason, then, the common opinion of mankind, little
    affected by the few dissentients who have contended for
    the opposite view, has found in the careful study of
    nature, and in the laws of nature, the foundations of
    the division of property, and the practice of all ages
    has consecrated the principle of private ownership, as
    being pre-eminently in conformity with human nature, and
    as conducing in the most unmistakable manner to the
    peace and tranquillity of human existence. The same
    principle is confirmed and enforced by the civil
    laws-laws which, so long as they are just, derive from
    the law of nature their binding force. The authority of
    the divine law adds its sanction, forbidding us in
    severest terms even to covet that which is another's:
    "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife; nor his
    house, nor his field, nor his man-servant, nor his
    maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that
    is his."

12. The rights here spoken of, belonging to each individual
    man, are seen in much stronger light when considered in
    relation to man's social and domestic obligations. In
    choosing a state of life, it is indisputable that all
    are at full liberty to follow the counsel of Jesus
    Christ as to observing virginity, or to bind themselves
    by the marriage tie. No human law can abolish the
    natural and original right of marriage, nor in any way
    limit the chief and principal purpose of marriage
    ordained by God's authority from the beginning:
    "Increase and multiply."Hence we have the family, the
    "society" of a man's house---a society very small, one
    must admit, but none the less a true society, and one
    older than any State. Consequently, it has rights and
    duties peculiar to itself which are quite independent of
    the State.

13. That right to property, therefore, which has been proved
    to belong naturally to individual persons, must in like
    wise belong to a man in his capacity of head of a
    family; nay, that right is all the stronger in
    proportion as the human person receives a wider
    extension in the family group. It is a most sacred law
    of nature that a father should provide food and all
    necessaries for those whom he has begotten; and,
    similarly, it is natural that he should wish that his
    children, who carry on, so to speak, and continue his
    personality, should be by him provided with all that is
    needful to enable them to keep themselves decently from
    want and misery amid the uncertainties of this mortal
    life. Now, in no other way can a father effect this
    except by the ownership of productive property, which he
    can transmit to his children by inheritance. A family,
    no less than a State, is, as We have said, a true
    society, governed by an authority peculiar to itself,
    that is to say, by the authority of the father.
    Provided, therefore, the limits which are prescribed by
    the very purposes for which it exists be not
    transgressed, the family has at least equal rights with
    the State in the choice and pursuit of the things
    needful to its preservation and its just liberty. We
    say, "at least equal rights"; for, inasmuch as the
    domestic household is antecedent, as well in idea as in
    fact, to the gathering of men into a community, the
    family must necessarily have rights and duties which are
    prior to those of the community, and founded more
    immediately in nature. If the citizens, if the families
    on entering into association and fellowship, were to
    experience hindrance in a commonwealth instead of help,
    and were to find their rights attacked instead of being
    upheld, society would rightly be an object of
    detestation rather than of desire.

14. The contention, then, that the civil government should
    at its option intrude into and exercise intimate control
    over the family and the household is a great and
    pernicious error. True, if a family finds itself in
    exceeding distress, utterly deprived of the counsel of
    friends, and without any prospect of extricating itself,
    it is right that extreme necessity be met by public aid,
    since each family is a part of the commonwealth. In like
    manner, if within the precincts of the household there
    occur grave disturbance of mutual rights, public
    authority should intervene to force each party to yield
    to the other its proper due; for this is not to deprive
    citizens of their rights, but justly and properly to
    safeguard and strengthen them. But the rulers of the
    commonwealth must go no further; here, nature bids them
    stop. Paternal authority can be neither abolished nor
    absorbed by the State; for it has the same source as
    human life itself. "The child belongs to the father,"
    and is, as it were, the continuation of the father's
    personality; and speaking strictly, the child takes its
    place in civil society, not of its own right, but in its
    quality as member of the family in which it is born. And
    for the very reason that "the child belongs to the
    father" it is, as St. Thomas Aquinas says, "before it
    attains the use of free will, under the power and the
    charge of its parents."The socialists, therefore, in
    setting aside the parent and setting up a State
    supervision, act against natural justice, and destroy
    the structure of the home.

15. And in addition to injustice, it is only too evident
    what an upset and disturbance there would be in all
    classes, and to how intolerable and hateful a slavery
    citizens would be subjected. The door would be thrown
    open to envy, to mutual invective, and to discord; the
    sources of wealth themselves would run dry, for no one
    would have any interest in exerting his talents or his
    industry; and that ideal equality about which they
    entertain pleasant dreams would be in reality the
    levelling down of all to a like condition of misery and
    degradation. Hence, it is clear that the main tenet of
    socialism, community of goods, must be utterly rejected,
    since it only injures those whom it would seem meant to
    benefit, is directly contrary to the natural rights of
    mankind, and would introduce confusion and disorder into
    the common-weal. The first and most fundamental
    principle, therefore, if one would undertake to
    alleviate the condition of the masses, must be the
    inviolability of private property. This being
    established, we proceed to show where the remedy sought
    for must be found.

16. We approach the subject with confidence, and in the
    exercise of the rights which manifestly appertain to Us,
    for no practical solution of this question will be found
    apart from the intervention of religion and of the
    Church. It is We who are the chief guardian of religion
    and the chief dispenser of what pertains to the Church;
    and by keeping silence we would seem to neglect the duty
    incumbent on us. Doubtless, this most serious question
    demands the attention and the efforts of others besides
    ourselves---to wit, of the rulers of States, of
    employers of labor, of the wealthy, aye, of the working
    classes themselves, for whom We are pleading. But We
    affirm without hesitation that all the striving of men
    will be vain if they leave out the Church. It is the
    Church that insists, on the authority of the Gospel,
    upon those teachings whereby the conflict can be brought
    to an end, or rendered, at least, far less bitter; the
    Church uses her efforts not only to enlighten the mind,
    but to direct by her precepts the life and conduct of
    each and all; the Church improves and betters the
    condition of the working man by means of numerous
    organizations; does her best to enlist the services of
    all classes in discussing and endeavoring to further in
    the most practical way, the interests of the working
    classes; and considers that for this purpose recourse
    should be had, in due measure and degree, to the
    intervention of the law and of State authority.

17. It must be first of all recognized that the condition of
    things inherent in human affairs must be borne with, for
    it is impossible to reduce civil society to one dead
    level. Socialists may in that intent do their utmost,
    but all striving against nature is in vain. There
    naturally exist among mankind manifold differences of
    the most important kind; people differ in capacity,
    skill, health, strength; and unequal fortune is a
    necessary result of unequal condition. Such inequality
    is far from being disadvantageous either to individuals
    or to the community. Social and public life can only be
    maintained by means of various kinds of capacity for
    business and the playing of many parts; and each man, as
    a rule, chooses the part which suits his own peculiar
    domestic condition. As regards bodily labor, even had
    man never fallen from the state of innocence, he would
    not have remained wholly idle; but that which would then
    have been his free choice and his delight became
    afterwards compulsory, and the painful expiation for his
    disobedience. "Cursed be the earth in thy work; in thy
    labor thou shalt eat of it all the days of thy life."

18. In like manner, the other pains and hardships of life
    will have no end or cessation on earth; for the
    consequences of sin are bitter and hard to bear, and
    they must accompany man so long as life lasts. To suffer
    and to endure, therefore, is the lot of humanity; let
    them strive as they may, no strength and no artifice
    will ever succeed in banishing from human life the ills
    and troubles which beset it. If any there are who
    pretend differently---who hold out to a hard-pressed
    people the boon of freedom from pain and trouble, an
    undisturbed repose, and constant enjoyment---they delude
    the people and impose upon them, and their lying
    promises will only one day bring forth evils worse than
    the present. Nothing is more useful than to look upon
    the world as it really is, and at the same time to seek
    elsewhere, as We have said, for the solace to its
    troubles.

19. The great mistake made in regard to the matter now under
    consideration is to take up with the notion that class
    is naturally hostile to class, and that the wealthy and
    the working men are intended by nature to live in mutual
    conflict. So irrational and so false is this view that
    the direct contrary is the truth. Just as the symmetry
    of the human frame is the result of the suitable
    arrangement of the different parts of the body, so in a
    State is it ordained by nature that these two classes
    should dwell in harmony and agreement, so as to maintain
    the balance of the body politic. Each needs the other:
    capital cannot do without labor, nor labor without
    capital. Mutual agreement results in the beauty of good
    order, while perpetual conflict necessarily produces
    confusion and savage barbarity. Now, in preventing such
    strife as this, and in uprooting it, the efficacy of
    Christian institutions is marvellous and manifold. First
    of all, there is no intermediary more powerful than
    religion (whereof the Church is the interpreter and
    guardian) in drawing the rich and the working class
    together, by reminding each of its duties to the other,
    and especially of the obligations of justice.

20. Of these duties, the following bind the proletarian and
    the worker: fully and faithfully to perform the work
    which has been freely and equitably agreed upon; never
    to injure the property, nor to outrage the person, of an
    employer; never to resort to violence in defending their
    own cause, nor to engage in riot or disorder; and to
    have nothing to do with men of evil principles, who work
    upon the people with artful promises of great results,
    and excite foolish hopes which usually end in useless
    regrets and grievous loss. The following duties bind the
    wealthy owner and the employer: not to look upon their
    work people as their bondsmen, but to respect in every
    man his dignity as a person ennobled by Christian
    character. They are reminded that, according to natural
    reason and Christian philosophy, working for gain is
    creditable, not shameful, to a man, since it enables him
    to earn an honorable livelihood; but to misuse men as
    though they were things in the pursuit of gain, or to
    value them solely for their physical powers---that is
    truly shameful and inhuman. Again justice demands that,
    in dealing with the working man, religion and the good
    of his soul must be kept in mind. Hence, the employer is
    bound to see that the worker has time for his religious
    duties; that he be not exposed to corrupting influences
    and dangerous occasions; and that he be not led away to
    neglect his home and family, or to squander his
    earnings. Furthermore, the employer must never tax his
    work people beyond their strength, or employ them in
    work unsuited to their sex and age. His great and
    principal duty is to give every one what is just.
    Doubtless, before deciding whether wages axe fair, many
    things have to be considered; but wealthy owners and all
    masters of labor should be mindful of this---that to
    exercise pressure upon the indigent and the destitute
    for the sake of gain, and to gather one's profit out of
    the need of another, is condemned by all laws, human and
    divine. To defraud any one of wages that are his due is
    a great crime which cries to the avenging anger of
    Heaven. "Behold, the hire of the laborers... which by
    fraud has been kept back by you, crieth; and the cry of
    them hath entered into the ears of the Lord of
    Sabbath."Lastly, the rich must religiously refrain from
    cutting down the workmen's earnings, whether by force,
    by fraud, or by usurious dealing; and with all the
    greater reason because the laboring man is, as a rule,
    weak and unprotected, and because his slender means
    should in proportion to their scantiness be accounted
    sacred. Were these precepts carefully obeyed and
    followed out, would they not be sufficient of themselves
    to keep under all strife and all its causes?

21. But the Church, with Jesus Christ as her Master and
    Guide, aims higher still. She lays down precepts yet
    more perfect, and tries to bind class to class in
    friendliness and good feeling. The things of earth
    cannot be understood or valued aright without taking
    into consideration the life to come, the life that will
    know no death. Exclude the idea of futurity, and
    forthwith the very notion of what is good and right
    would perish; nay, the whole scheme of the universe
    would become a dark and unfathomable mystery. The great
    truth which we learn from nature herself is also the
    grand Christian dogma on which religion rests as on its
    foundation---that, when we have given up this present
    life, then shall we really begin to live. God has not
    created us for the perishable and transitory things of
    earth, but for things heavenly and everlasting; He has
    given us this world as a place of exile, and not as our
    abiding place. As for riches and the other things which
    men call good and desirable, whether we have them in
    abundance, or are lacking in them-so far as eternal
    happiness is concerned---it makes no difference; the
    only important thing is to use them aright. Jesus
    Christ, when He redeemed us with plentiful redemption,
    took not away the pains and sorrows which in such large
    proportion are woven together in the web of our mortal
    life. He transformed them into motives of virtue and
    occasions of merit; and no man can hope for eternal
    reward unless he follow in the blood-stained footprints
    of his Saviour. "If we suffer with Him, we shall also
    reign with Him."Christ's labors and sufferings, accepted
    of His own free will, have marvellously sweetened all
    suffering and all labor. And not only by His example,
    but by His grace and by the hope held forth of
    everlasting recompense, has He made pain and grief more
    easy to endure; "for that which is at present momentary
    and light of our tribulation, worketh for us above
    measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory."

22. Therefore, those whom fortune favors are warned that
    riches do not bring freedom from sorrow and are of no
    avail for eternal happiness, but rather are
    obstacles;that the rich should tremble at the
    threatenings of Jesus Christ---threatenings so unwonted
    in the mouth of our Lord---and that a most strict
    account must be given to the Supreme Judge for all we
    possess. The chief and most excellent rule for the right
    use of money is one the heathen philosophers hinted at,
    but which the Church has traced out clearly, and has not
    only made known to men's minds, but has impressed upon
    their lives. It rests on the principle that it is one
    thing to have a right to the possession of money and
    another to have a right to use money as one wills.
    Private ownership, as we have seen, is the natural right
    of man, and to exercise that right, especially as
    members of society, is not only lawful, but absolutely
    necessary. "It is lawful," says St. Thomas Aquinas, "for
    a man to hold private property; and it is also necessary
    for the carrying on of human existence."But if the
    question be asked: How must one's possessions be
    used?---the Church replies without hesitation in the
    words of the same holy Doctor: "Man should not consider
    his material possessions as his own, but as common to
    all, so as to share them without hesitation when others
    are in need. Whence the Apostle with, 'Command the rich
    of this world... to offer with no stint, to apportion
    largely.'"True, no one is commanded to distribute to
    others that which is required for his own needs and
    those of his household; nor even to give away what is
    reasonably required to keep up becomingly his condition
    in life, "for no one ought to live other than
    becomingly."But, when what necessity demands has been
    supplied, and one's standing fairly taken thought for,
    it becomes a duty to give to the indigent out of what
    remains over. "Of that which remaineth, give alms."It is
    a duty, not of justice (save in extreme cases), but of
    Christian charity---a duty not enforced by human law.
    But the laws and judgments of men must yield place to
    the laws and judgments of Christ the true God, who in
    many ways urges on His followers the practice of
    alms-giving---'It is more blessed to give than to
    receive";and who will count a kindness done or refused
    to the poor as done or refused to Himself---"As long as
    you did it to one of My least brethren you did it to
    Me."To sum up, then, what has been said: Whoever has
    received from the divine bounty a large share of
    temporal blessings, whether they be external and
    material, or gifts of the mind, has received them for
    the purpose of using them for the perfecting of his own
    nature, and, at the same time, that he may employ them,
    as the steward of God's providence, for the benefit of
    others. "He that hath a talent," said St. Gregory the
    Great, "let him see that he hide it not; he that hath
    abundance, let him quicken himself to mercy and
    generosity; he that hath art and skill, let him do his
    best to share the use and the utility hereof with his
    neighbor."

23. As for those who possess not the gifts of fortune, they
    are taught by the Church that in God's sight poverty is
    no disgrace, and that there is nothing to be ashamed of
    in earning their bread by labor. This is enforced by
    what we see in Christ Himself, who, "whereas He was
    rich, for our sakes became poor";and who, being the Son
    of God, and God Himself, chose to seem and to be
    considered the son of a carpenter---nay, did not disdain
    to spend a great part of His life as a carpenter
    Himself. "Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary?"

24. From contemplation of this divine Model, it is more easy
    to understand that the true worth and nobility of man
    lie in his moral qualities, that is, in virtue; that
    virtue is, moreover, the common inheritance of men,
    equally within the reach of high and low, rich and poor;
    and that virtue, and virtue alone, wherever found, will
    be followed by the rewards of everlasting happiness.
    Nay, God Himself seems to incline rather to those who
    suffer misfortune; for Jesus Christ calls the poor
    "blessed";He lovingly invites those in labor and grief
    to come to Him for solace;and He displays the tenderest
    charity toward the lowly and the oppressed. These
    reflections cannot fail to keep down the pride of the
    well-to-do, and to give heart to the unfortunate; to
    move the former to be generous and the latter to be
    moderate in their desires. Thus, the separation which
    pride would set up tends to disappear, nor will it be
    difficult to make rich and poor join hands in friendly
    concord.

25. But, if Christian precepts prevail, the respective
    classes will not only be united in the bonds of
    friendship, but also in those of brotherly love. For
    they will understand and feel that all men are children
    of the same common Father, who is God; that all have
    alike the same last end, which is God Himself, who alone
    can make either men or angels absolutely and perfectly
    happy; that each and all are redeemed and made sons of
    God, by Jesus Christ, "the first-born among many
    brethren"; that the blessings of nature and the gifts of
    grace belong to the whole human race in common, and that
    from none except the unworthy is withheld the
    inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven. "If sons, heirs
    also; heirs indeed of God, and co-heirs with
    Christ."Such is the scheme of duties and of rights which
    is shown forth to the world by the Gospel. Would it not
    seem that, were society penetrated with ideas like
    these, strife must quickly cease?

26. But the Church, not content with pointing out the
    remedy, also applies it. For the Church does her utmost
    to teach and to train men, and to educate them and by
    the intermediary of her bishops and clergy diffuses her
    salutary teachings far and wide. She strives to
    influence the mind and the heart so that all may
    willingly yield themselves to be formed and guided by
    the commandments of God. It is precisely in this
    fundamental and momentous matter, on which everything
    depends that the Church possesses a power peculiarly her
    own. The instruments which she employs are given to her
    by Jesus Christ Himself for the very purpose of reaching
    the hearts of men, and drive their efficiency from God.
    They alone can reach the innermost heart and conscience,
    and bring men to act from a motive of duty, to control
    their passions and appetites, to love God and their
    fellow men with a love that is outstanding and of the
    highest degree and to break down courageously every
    barrier which blocks the way to virtue.

27. On this subject we need but recall for one moment the
    examples recorded in history. Of these facts there
    cannot be any shadow of doubt: for instance, that civil
    society was renovated in every part by Christian
    institutions; that in the strength of that renewal the
    human race was lifted up to better things-nay, that it
    was brought back from death to life, and to so excellent
    a life that nothing more perfect had been known before,
    or will come to be known in the ages that have yet to
    be. Of this beneficent transformation Jesus Christ was
    at once the first cause and the final end; as from Him
    all came, so to Him was all to be brought back. For,
    when the human race, by the light of the Gospel message,
    came to know the grand mystery of the Incarnation of the
    Word and the redemption of man, at once the life of
    Jesus Christ, God and Man, pervaded every race and
    nation, and interpenetrated them with His faith, His
    precepts, and His laws. And if human society is to be
    healed now, in no other way can it be healed save by a
    return to Christian life and Christian institutions.
    When a society is perishing, the wholesome advice to
    give to those who would restore it is to call it to the
    principles from which it sprang; for the purpose and
    perfection of an association is to aim at and to attain
    that for which it is formed, and its efforts should be
    put in motion and inspired by the end and object which
    originally gave it being. Hence, to fall away from its
    primal constitution implies disease; to go back to it,
    recovery. And this may be asserted with utmost truth
    both of the whole body of the commonwealth and of that
    class of its citizens-by far the great majority---who
    get their living by their labor.

28. Neither must it be supposed that the solicitude of the
    Church is so preoccupied with the spiritual concerns of
    her children as to neglect their temporal and earthly
    interests. Her desire is that the poor, for example,
    should rise above poverty and wretchedness, and better
    their condition in life; and for this she makes a strong
    endeavor. By the fact that she calls men to virtue and
    forms them to its practice she promotes this in no
    slight degree. Christian morality, when adequately and
    completely practiced, leads of itself to temporal
    prosperity, for it merits the blessing of that God who
    is the source of all blessings; it powerfully restrains
    the greed of possession and the thirst for pleasure-twin
    plagues, which too often make a man who is void of
    self-restraint miserable in the midst of abundance;it
    makes men supply for the lack of means through economy,
    teaching them to be content with frugal living, and
    further, keeping them out of the reach of those vices
    which devour not small incomes merely, but large
    fortunes, and dissipate many a goodly inheritance.

29. The Church, moreover, intervenes directly in behalf of
    the poor, by setting on foot and maintaining many
    associations which she knows to be efficient for the
    relief of poverty. Herein, again, she has always
    succeeded so well as to have even extorted the praise of
    her enemies. Such was the ardor of brotherly love among
    the earliest Christians that numbers of those who were
    in better circumstances despoiled themselves of their
    possessions in order to relieve their brethren; whence
    "neither was there any one needy among them."To the
    order of deacons, instituted in that very intent, was
    committed by the Apostles the charge of the daily doles;
    and the Apostle Paul, though burdened with the
    solicitude of all the churches, hesitated not to
    undertake laborious journeys in order to carry the alms
    of the faithful to the poorer Christians. Tertullian
    calls these contributions, given voluntarily by
    Christians in their assemblies, deposits of piety,
    because, to cite his own words, they were employed "in
    feeding the needy, in burying them, in support of youths
    and maidens destitute of means and deprived of their
    parents, in the care of the aged, and the relief of the
    shipwrecked."

30. Thus, by degrees, came into existence the patrimony
    which the Church has guarded with religious care as the
    inheritance of the poor. Nay, in order to spare them the
    shame of begging, the Church has provided aid for the
    needy. The common Mother of rich and poor has aroused
    everywhere the heroism of charity, and has established
    congregations of religious and many other useful
    institutions for help and mercy, so that hardly any kind
    of suffering could exist which was not afforded relief.
    At the present day many there are who, like the heathen
    of old, seek to blame and condemn the Church for such
    eminent charity. They would substitute in its stead a
    system of relief organized by the State. But no human
    expedients will ever make up for the devotedness and
    self sacrifice of Christian charity. Charity, as a
    virtue, pertains to the Church; for virtue it is not,
    unless it be drawn from the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus
    Christ; and whosoever turns his back on the Church
    cannot be near to Christ.

31. It cannot, however, be doubted that to attain the
    purpose we are treating of, not only the Church, but all
    human agencies, must concur. All who are concerned in
    the matter should be of one mind and according to their
    ability act together. It is with this, as with
    providence that governs the world; the results of causes
    do not usually take place save where all the causes
    cooperate. It is sufficient, therefore, to inquire what
    part the State should play in the work of remedy and
    relief.

32. By the State we here understand, not the particular form
    of government prevailing in this or that nation, but the
    State as rightly apprehended; that is to say, any
    government conformable in its institutions to right
    reason and natural law, and to those dictates of the
    divine wisdom which we have expounded in the encyclical
    *On the Christian Constitution of the State.*The
    foremost duty, therefore, of the rulers of the State
    should be to make sure that the laws and institutions,
    the general character and administration of the
    commonwealth, shall be such as of themselves to realize
    public well-being and private prosperity. This is the
    proper scope of wise statesmanship and is the work of
    the rulers. Now a State chiefly prospers and thrives
    through moral rule, well-regulated family life, respect
    for religion and justice, the moderation and fair
    imposing of public taxes, the progress of the arts and
    of trade, the abundant yield of the land-through
    everything, in fact, which makes the citizens better and
    happier. Hereby, then, it lies in the power of a ruler
    to benefit every class in the State, and amongst the
    rest to promote to the utmost the interests of the poor;
    and this in virtue of his office, and without being open
    to suspicion of undue interference---since it is the
    province of the commonwealth to serve the common good.
    And the more that is done for the benefit of the working
    classes by the general laws of the country, the less
    need will there be to seek for special means to relieve
    them.

33. There is another and deeper consideration which must not
    be lost sight of. As regards the State, the interests of
    all, whether high or low, are equal. The members of the
    working classes are citizens by nature and by the same
    right as the rich; they are real parts, living the life
    which makes up, through the family, the body of the
    commonwealth; and it need hardly be said that they are
    in every city very largely in the majority. It would be
    irrational to neglect one portion of the citizens and
    favor another, and therefore the public administration
    must duly and solicitously provide for the welfare and
    the comfort of the working classes; otherwise, that law
    of justice will be violated which ordains that each man
    shall have his due. To cite the wise words of St. Thomas
    Aquinas: "As the part and the whole are in a certain
    sense identical, so that which belongs to the whole in a
    sense belongs to the part."Among the many and grave
    duties of rulers who would do their best for the people,
    the first and chief is to act with strict justice---with
    that justice which is called *distributive*---toward
    each and every class alike.

34. But although all citizens, without exception, can and
    ought to contribute to that common good in which
    individuals share so advantageously to themselves, yet
    it should not be supposed that all can contribute in the
    like way and to the same extent. No matter what changes
    may occur in forms of government, there will ever be
    differences and inequalities of condition in the State.
    Society cannot exist or be conceived of without them.
    Some there must be who devote themselves to the work of
    the commonwealth, who make the laws or administer
    justice, or whose advice and authority govern the nation
    in times of peace, and defend it in war. Such men
    clearly occupy the foremost place in the State, and
    should be held in highest estimation, for their work
    concerns most nearly and effectively the general
    interests of the community. Those who labor at a trade
    or calling do not promote the general welfare in such
    measure as this, but they benefit the nation, if less
    directly, in a most important manner. We have insisted,
    it is true, that, since the end of society is to make
    men better, the chief good that society can possess is
    virtue. Nevertheless, it is the business of a
    well-constituted body politic to see to the provision of
    those material and external helps "the use of which is
    necessary to virtuous action."Now, for the provision of
    such commodities, the labor of the working class---the
    exercise of their skill, and the employment of their
    strength, in the cultivation of the land, and in the
    workshops of trade---is especially responsible and quite
    indispensable. Indeed, their co-operation is in this
    respect so important that it may be truly said that it
    is only by the labor of working men that States grow
    rich. Justice, therefore, demands that the interests of
    the working classes should be carefully watched over by
    the administration, so that they who contribute so
    largely to the advantage of the community may themselves
    share in the benefits which they create-that being
    housed, clothed, and bodily fit, they may find their
    life less hard and more endurable. It follows that
    whatever shall appear to prove conducive to the
    well-being of those who work should obtain favorable
    consideration. There is no fear that solicitude of this
    kind will be harmful to any interest; on the contrary,
    it will be to the advantage of all, for it cannot but be
    good for the commonwealth to shield from misery those on
    whom it so largely depends for the things that it needs.

35. We have said that the State must not absorb the
    individual or the family; both should be allowed free
    and untrammelled action so far as is consistent with the
    common good and the interest of others. Rulers should,
    nevertheless, anxiously safeguard the community and all
    its members; the community, because the conservation
    thereof is so emphatically the business of the supreme
    power, that the safety of the commonwealth is not only
    the first law, but it is a government's whole reason of
    existence; and the members, because both philosophy and
    the Gospel concur in laying down that the object of the
    government of the State should be, not the advantage of
    the ruler, but the benefit of those over whom he is
    placed. As the power to rule comes from God, and is, as
    it were, a participation in His, the highest of all
    sovereignties, it should be exercised as the power of
    God is exercised---with a fatherly solicitude which not
    only guides the whole, but reaches also individuals.

36. Whenever the general interest or any particular class
    suffers, or is threatened with harm, which can in no
    other way be met or prevented, the public authority must
    step in to deal with it. Now, it is to the interest of
    the community, as well as of the individual, that peace
    and good order should be maintained; that all things
    should be carried on in accordance with God's laws and
    those of nature; that the discipline of family life
    should be observed and that religion should be obeyed;
    that a high standard of morality should prevail, both in
    public and private life; that justice should be held
    sacred and that no one should injure another with
    impunity; that the members of the commonwealth should
    grow up to man's estate strong and robust, and capable,
    if need be, of guarding and defending their country. If
    by a strike of workers or concerted interruption of work
    there should be imminent danger of disturbance to the
    public peace; or if circumstances were such as that
    among the working class the ties of family life were
    relaxed; if religion were found to suffer through the
    workers not having time and opportunity afforded them to
    practice its duties; if in workshops and factories there
    were danger to morals through the mixing of the sexes or
    from other harmful occasions of evil; or if employers
    laid burdens upon their workmen which were unjust, or
    degraded them with conditions repugnant to their dignity
    as human beings; finally, if health were endangered by
    excessive labor, or by work unsuited to sex or age---in
    such cases, there can be no question but that, within
    certain limits, it would be right to invoke the aid and
    authority of the law. The limits must be determined by
    the nature of the occasion which calls for the law's
    interference---the principle being that the law must not
    undertake more, nor proceed further, than is required
    for the remedy of the evil or the removal of the
    mischief.

37. Rights must be religiously respected wherever they
    exist, and it is the duty of the public authority to
    prevent and to punish injury, and to protect every one
    in the possession of his own. Still, when there is
    question of defending the rights of individuals, the
    poor and badly off have a claim to especial
    consideration. The richer class have many ways of
    shielding themselves, and stand less in need of help
    from the State; whereas the mass of the poor have no
    resources of their own to fall back upon, and must
    chiefly depend upon the assistance of the State. And it
    is for this reason that wage-earners, since they mostly
    belong in the mass of the needy, should be specially
    cared for and protected by the government.

38. Here, however, it is expedient to bring under special
    notice certain matters of moment. First of all, there is
    the duty of safeguarding private property by legal
    enactment and protection. Most of all it is essential,
    where the passion of greed is so strong, to keep the
    populace within the line of duty; for, if all may justly
    strive to better their condition, neither justice nor
    the common good allows any individual to seize upon that
    which belongs to another, or, under the futile and
    shallow pretext of equality, to lay violent hands on
    other people's possessions. Most true it is that by far
    the larger part of the workers prefer to better
    themselves by honest labor rather than by doing any
    wrong to others. But there are not a few who are imbued
    with evil principles and eager for revolutionary change,
    whose main purpose is to stir up disorder and incite
    their fellows to acts of violence. The authority of the
    law should intervene to put restraint upon such
    firebrands, to save the working classes from being led
    astray by their maneuvers, and to protect lawful owners
    from spoliation.

39. When work people have recourse to a strike and become
    voluntarily idle, it is frequently because the hours of
    labor are too long, or the work too hard, or because
    they consider their wages insufficient. The grave
    inconvenience of this not uncommon occurrence should be
    obviated by public remedial measures; for such
    paralysing of labor not only affects the masters and
    their work people alike, but is extremely injurious to
    trade and to the general interests of the public;
    moreover, on such occasions, violence and disorder are
    generally not far distant, and thus it frequently
    happens that the public peace is imperiled. The laws
    should forestall and prevent such troubles from arising;
    they should lend their influence and authority to the
    removal in good time of the causes which lead to
    conflicts between employers and employed.

40. The working man, too, has interests in which he should
    be protected by the State; and first of all, there are
    the interests of his soul. Life on earth, however good
    and desirable in itself, is not the final purpose for
    which man is created; it is only the way and the means
    to that attainment of truth and that love of goodness in
    which the full life of the soul consists. It is the soul
    which is made after the image and likeness of God; it is
    in the soul that the sovereignty resides in virtue
    whereof man is commanded to rule the creatures below him
    and to use all the earth and the ocean for his profit
    and advantage. "Fill the earth and subdue it; and rule
    over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air,
    and all living creatures that move upon the earth."In
    this respect all men are equal; there is here no
    difference between rich and poor, master and servant,
    ruler and ruled, "for the same is Lord over all."[^1] No
    man may with impunity outrage that human dignity which
    God Himself treats with great reverence, nor stand in
    the way of that higher life which is the preparation of
    the eternal life of heaven. Nay, more; no man has in
    this matter power over himself. To consent to any
    treatment which is calculated to defeat the end and
    purpose of his being is beyond his right; he cannot give
    up his soul to servitude, for it is not man's own rights
    which are here in question, but the rights of God, the
    most sacred and inviolable of rights.

41. From this follows the obligation of the cessation from
    work and labor on Sundays and certain holy days. The
    rest from labor is not to be understood as mere giving
    way to idleness; much less must it be an occasion for
    spending money and for vicious indulgence, as many would
    have it to be; but it should be rest from labor,
    hallowed by religion. Rest (combined with religious
    observances) disposes man to forget for a while the
    business of his everyday life, to turn his thoughts to
    things heavenly, and to the worship which he so strictly
    owes to the eternal Godhead. It is this, above all,
    which is the reason arid motive of Sunday rest; a rest
    sanctioned by God's great law of the Ancient
    Covenant-"Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day,"and
    taught to the world by His own mysterious "rest" after
    the creation of man: "He rested on the seventh day from
    all His work which He had done."

42. If we turn not to things external and material, the
    first thing of all to secure is to save unfortunate
    working people from the cruelty of men of greed, who use
    human beings as mere instruments for money-making. It is
    neither just nor human so to grind men down with
    excessive labor as to stupefy their minds and wear out
    their bodies. Man's powers, like his general nature, are
    limited, and beyond these limits he cannot go. His
    strength is developed and increased by use and exercise,
    but only on condition of due intermission and proper
    rest. Daily labor, therefore, should be so regulated as
    not to be protracted over longer hours than strength
    admits. How many and how long the intervals of rest
    should be must depend on the nature of the work, on
    circumstances of time and place, and on the health and
    strength of the workman. Those who work in mines and
    quarries, and extract coal, stone and metals from the
    bowels of the earth, should have shorter hours in
    proportion as their labor is more severe and trying to
    health. Then, again, the season of the year should be
    taken into account; for not infrequently a kind of labor
    is easy at one time which at another is intolerable or
    exceedingly difficult. Finally, work which is quite
    suitable for a strong man cannot rightly be required
    from a woman or a child. And, in regard to children,
    great care should be taken not to place them in
    workshops and factories until their bodies and minds are
    sufficiently developed. For, just as very rough weather
    destroys the buds of spring, so does too early an
    experience of life's hard toil blight the young promise
    of a child's faculties, and render any true education
    impossible. Women, again, are not suited for certain
    occupations; a woman is by nature fitted for home-work,
    and it is that which is best adapted at once to preserve
    her modesty and to promote the good bringing up of
    children and the well-being of the family. As a general
    principle it may be laid down that a workman ought to
    have leisure and rest proportionate to the wear and tear
    of his strength, for waste of strength must be repaired
    by cessation from hard work. In all agreements between
    masters and work people there is always the condition
    expressed or understood that there should be allowed
    proper rest for soul and body. To agree in any other
    sense would be against what is right and just; for it
    can never be just or right to require on the one side,
    or to promise on the other, the giving up of those
    duties which a man owes to his God and to himself.

43. We now approach a subject of great importance, and one
    in respect of which, if extremes are to be avoided,
    right notions are absolutely necessary. Wages, as we are
    told, are regulated by free consent, and therefore the
    employer, when he pays what was agreed upon, has done
    his part and seemingly is not called upon to do anything
    beyond. The only way, it is said, in which injustice
    might occur would be if the master refused to pay the
    whole of the wages, or if the workman should not
    complete the work undertaken; in such cases the public
    authority should intervene, to see that each obtains his
    due, but not under any other circumstances.

44. To this kind of argument a fair-minded man will not
    easily or entirely assent; it is not complete, for there
    are important considerations which it leaves out of
    account altogether. To labor is to exert oneself for the
    sake of procuring what is necessary for the various
    purposes of life, and chief of all for self
    preservation. "In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat
    bread."Hence, a man's labor necessarily bears two notes
    or characters. First of all, it is personal, inasmuch as
    the force which acts is bound up with the personality
    and is the exclusive property of him who acts, and,
    further, was given to him for his advantage. Secondly,
    man's labor is necessary; for without the result of
    labor a man cannot live, and self-preservation is a law
    of nature, which it is wrong to disobey. Now, were we to
    consider labor merely in so far as it is personal,
    doubtless it would be within the workman's right to
    accept any rate of wages whatsoever; for in the same way
    as he is free to work or not, so is he free to accept a
    small wage or even none at all. But our conclusion must
    be very different if, together with the personal element
    in a man's work, we consider the fact that work is also
    necessary for him to live: these two aspects of his work
    are separable in thought, but not in reality. The
    preservation of life is the bounden duty of one and all,
    and to be wanting therein is a crime. It necessarily
    follows that each one has a natural right to procure
    what is required in order to live, and the poor can
    procure that in no other way than by what they can earn
    through their work.

45. Let the working man and the employer make free
    agreements, and in particular let them agree freely as
    to the wages; nevertheless, there underlies a dictate of
    natural justice more imperious and ancient than any
    bargain between man and man, namely, that wages ought
    not to be insufficient to support a frugal and
    well-behaved wage-earner. If through necessity or fear
    of a worse evil the workman accept harder conditions
    because an employer or contractor will afford him no
    better, he is made the victim of force and injustice. In
    these and similar questions, however---such as, for
    example, the hours of labor in different trades, the
    sanitary precautions to be observed in factories and
    workshops, etc.---in order to supersede undue
    interference on the part of the State, especially as
    circumstances, times, and localities differ so widely,
    it is advisable that recourse be had to societies or
    boards such as We shall mention presently, or to some
    other mode of safeguarding the interests of the
    wage-earners; the State being appealed to, should
    circumstances require, for its sanction and protection.

46. If a workman's wages be sufficient to enable him
    comfortably to support himself, his wife, and his
    children, he will find it easy, if he be a sensible man,
    to practice thrift, and he will not fail, by cutting
    down expenses, to put by some little savings and thus
    secure a modest source of income. Nature itself would
    urge him to this. We have seen that this great labor
    question cannot be solved save by assuming as a
    principle that private ownership must be held sacred and
    inviolable. The law, therefore, should favor ownership,
    and its policy should be to induce as many as possible
    of the people to become owners.

47. Many excellent results will follow from this; and, first
    of all, property will certainly become more equitably
    divided. For, the result of civil change and revolution
    has been to divide cities into two classes separated by
    a wide chasm. On the one side there is the party which
    holds power because it holds wealth; which has in its
    grasp the whole of labor and trade; which manipulates
    for its own benefit and its own purposes all the sources
    of supply, and which is not without influence even in
    the administration of the commonwealth. On the other
    side there is the needy and powerless multitude, sick
    and sore in spirit and ever ready for disturbance. If
    working people can be encouraged to look forward to
    obtaining a share in the land, the consequence will be
    that the gulf between vast wealth and sheer poverty will
    be bridged over, and the respective classes will be
    brought nearer to one another. A further consequence
    will result in the great abundance of the fruits of the
    earth. Men always work harder and more readily when they
    work on that which belongs to them; nay, they learn to
    love the very soil that yields in response to the labor
    of their hands, not only food to eat, but an abundance
    of good things for themselves and those that are dear to
    them. That such a spirit of willing labor would add to
    the produce of the earth and to the wealth of the
    community is self evident. And a third advantage would
    spring from this: men would cling to the country in
    which they were born, for no one would exchange his
    country for a foreign land if his own afforded him the
    means of living a decent and happy life. These three
    important benefits, however, can be reckoned on only
    provided that a man's means be not drained and exhausted
    by excessive taxation. The right to possess private
    property is derived from nature, not from man; and the
    State has the right to control its use in the interests
    of the public good alone, but by no means to absorb it
    altogether. The State would therefore be unjust and
    cruel if under the name of taxation it were to deprive
    the private owner of more than is fair.

48. In the last place, employers and workmen may of
    themselves effect much, in the matter We are treating,
    by means of such associations and organizations as
    afford opportune aid to those who are in distress, and
    which draw the two classes more closely together. Among
    these may be enumerated societies for mutual help;
    various benevolent foundations established by private
    persons to provide for the workman, and for his widow or
    his orphans, in case of sudden calamity, in sickness,
    and in the event of death; and institutions for the
    welfare of boys and girls, young people, and those more
    advanced in years.

49. The consciousness of his own weakness urges man to call
    in aid from without. We read in the pages of holy Writ:
    "It is better that two should be together than one; for
    they have the advantage of their society. If one fall he
    shall be supported by the other. Woe to him that is
    alone, for when he falleth he hath none to lift him
    up."And further: "A brother that is helped by his
    brother is like a strong city."It is this natural
    impulse which binds men together in civil society; and
    it is likewise this which leads them to join together in
    associations which are, it is true, lesser and not
    independent societies, but, nevertheless, real
    societies.

50. The most important of all are workingmen's unions, for
    these virtually include all the rest. History attests
    what excellent results were brought about by the
    artificers' guilds of olden times. They were the means
    of affording not only many advantages to the workmen,
    but in no small degree of promoting the advancement of
    art, as numerous monuments remain to bear witness. Such
    unions should be suited to the requirements of this our
    age---an age of wider education, of different habits,
    and of far more numerous requirements in daily life. It
    is gratifying to know that there are actually in
    existence not a few associations of this nature,
    consisting either of workmen alone, or of workmen and
    employers together, but it were greatly to be desired
    that they should become more numerous and more
    efficient. We have spoken of them more than once, yet it
    will be well to explain here how notably they are
    needed, to show that they exist of their own right, and
    what should be their organization and their mode of
    action.

51. These lesser societies and the larger society differ in
    many respects, because their immediate purpose and aim
    are different. Civil society exists for the common good,
    and hence is concerned with the interests of all in
    general, albeit with individual interests also in their
    due place and degree. It is therefore called a public
    society, because by its agency, as St. Thomas of Aquinas
    says, "Men establish relations in common with one
    another in the setting up of a commonwealth."But
    societies which are formed in the bosom of the
    commonwealth are styled *private*, and rightly so, since
    their immediate purpose is the private advantage of the
    associates. "Now, a private society," says St. Thomas
    again, "is one which is formed for the purpose of
    carrying out private objects; as when two or three enter
    into partnership with the view of trading in
    common."Private societies, then, although they exist
    within the body politic, and are severally part of the
    commonwealth, cannot nevertheless be absolutely, and as
    such, prohibited by public authority. For, to enter into
    a "society" of this kind is the natural right of man;
    and the State has for its office to protect natural
    rights, not to destroy them; and, if it forbid its
    citizens to form associations, it contradicts the very
    principle of its own existence, for both they and it
    exist in virtue of the like principle, namely, the
    natural tendency of man to dwell in society.

52. There are occasions, doubtless, when it is fitting that
    the law should intervene to prevent certain
    associations, as when men join together for purposes
    which are evidently bad, unlawful, or dangerous to the
    State. In such cases, public authority may justly forbid
    the formation of such associations, and may dissolve
    them if they already exist. But every precaution should
    be taken not to violate the rights of individuals and
    not to impose unreasonable regulations under pretense of
    public benefit. For laws only bind when they are in
    accordance with right reason, and, hence, with the
    eternal law of God.

53. And here we are reminded of the confraternities,
    societies, and religious orders which have arisen by the
    Church's authority and the piety of Christian men. The
    annals of every nation down to our own days bear witness
    to what they have accomplished for the human race. It is
    indisputable that on grounds of reason alone such
    associations, being perfectly blameless in their
    objects, possess the sanction of the law of nature. In
    their religious aspect they claim rightly to be
    responsible to the Church alone. The rulers of the State
    accordingly have no rights over them, nor can they claim
    any share in their control; on the contrary, it is the
    duty of the State to respect and cherish them, and, if
    need be, to defend them from attack. It is notorious
    that a very different course has been followed, more
    especially in our own times. In many places the State
    authorities have laid violent hands on these
    communities, and committed manifold injustice against
    them; it has placed them under control of the civil law,
    taken away their rights as corporate bodies, and
    despoiled them of their property, in such property the
    Church had her rights, each member of the body had his
    or her rights, and there were also the rights of those
    who had founded or endowed these communities for a
    definite purpose, and, furthermore, of those for whose
    benefit and assistance they had their being. Therefore
    We cannot refrain from complaining of such spoliation as
    unjust and fraught with evil results; and with all the
    more reason do We complain because, at the very time
    when the law proclaims that association is free to all,
    We see that Catholic societies, however peaceful and
    useful, are hampered in every way, whereas the utmost
    liberty is conceded to individuals whose purposes are at
    once hurtful to religion and dangerous to the
    commonwealth.

54. Associations of every kind, and especially those of
    working men, are now far more common than heretofore. As
    regards many of these there is no need at present to
    inquire whence they spring, what are their objects, or
    what the means they imply. Now, there is a good deal of
    evidence in favor of the opinion that many of these
    societies are in the hands of secret leaders, and are
    managed on principles ill---according with Christianity
    and the public well-being; and that they do their utmost
    to get within their grasp the whole field of labor, and
    force working men either to join them or to starve.
    Under these circumstances Christian working men must do
    one of two things: either join associations in which
    their religion will be exposed to peril, or form
    associations among themselves and unite their forces so
    as to shake off courageously the yoke of so unrighteous
    and intolerable an oppression. No one who does not wish
    to expose man's chief good to extreme risk will for a
    moment hesitate to say that the second alternative
    should by all means be adopted.

55. Those Catholics are worthy of all praise-and they are
    not a few-who, understanding what the times require,
    have striven, by various undertakings and endeavors, to
    better the condition of the working class by rightful
    means. They have taken up the cause of the working man,
    and have spared no efforts to better the condition both
    of families and individuals; to infuse a spirit of
    equity into the mutual relations of employers and
    employed; to keep before the eyes of both classes the
    precepts of duty and the laws of the Gospel---that
    Gospel which, by inculcating self restraint, keeps men
    within the bounds of moderation, and tends to establish
    harmony among the divergent interests and the various
    classes which compose the body politic. It is with such
    ends in view that we see men of eminence, meeting
    together for discussion, for the promotion of concerted
    action, and for practical work. Others, again, strive to
    unite working men of various grades into associations,
    help them with their advice and means, and enable them
    to obtain fitting and profitable employment. The
    bishops, on their part, bestow their ready good will and
    support; and with their approval and guidance many
    members of the clergy, both secular and regular, labor
    assiduously in behalf of the spiritual interest of the
    members of such associations. And there are not wanting
    Catholics blessed with affluence, who have, as it were,
    cast in their lot with the wage-earners, and who have
    spent large sums in founding and widely spreading
    benefit and insurance societies, by means of which the
    working man may without difficulty acquire through his
    labor not only many present advantages, but also the
    certainty of honorable support in days to come. How
    greatly such manifold and earnest activity has benefited
    the community at large is too well known to require Us
    to dwell upon it. We find therein grounds for most
    cheering hope in the future, provided always that the
    associations We have described continue to grow and
    spread, and are well and wisely administered. The State
    should watch over these societies of citizens banded
    together in accordance with their rights, but it should
    not thrust itself into their peculiar concerns and their
    organization, for things move and live by the spirit
    inspiring them, and may be killed by the rough grasp of
    a hand from without.

56. In order that an association may be carried on with
    unity of purpose and harmony of action, its
    administration and government should be firm and wise.
    All such societies, being free to exist, have the
    further right to adopt such rules and organization as
    may best conduce to the attainment of their respective
    objects. We do not judge it possible to enter into
    minute particulars touching the subject of organization;
    this must depend on national character, on practice and
    experience, on the nature and aim of the work to be
    done, on the scope of the various trades and
    employments, and on other circumstances of fact and of
    time---all of which should be carefully considered.

57. To sum up, then, We may lay it down as a general and
    lasting law that working men's associations should be so
    organized and governed as to furnish the best and most
    suitable means for attaining what is aimed at, that is
    to say, for helping each individual member to better his
    condition to the utmost in body, soul, and property. It
    is clear that they must pay special and chief attention
    to the duties of religion and morality, and that social
    betterment should have this chiefly in view; otherwise
    they would lose wholly their special character, and end
    by becoming little better than those societies which
    take no account whatever of religion. What advantage can
    it be to a working man to obtain by means of a society
    material well-being, if he endangers his soul for lack
    of spiritual food? "What doth it profit a man, if he
    gain the whole world and suffer the loss of his
    soul?"This, as our Lord teaches, is the mark or
    character that distinguishes the Christian from the
    heathen. "After all these things do the heathen seek...
    Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His justice: and
    all these things shall be added unto you."Let our
    associations, then, look first and before all things to
    God; let religious instruction have therein the foremost
    place, each one being carefully taught what is his duty
    to God, what he has to believe, what to hope for, and
    how he is to work out his salvation; and let all be
    warned and strengthened with special care against wrong
    principles and false teaching. Let the working man be
    urged and led to the worship of God, to the earnest
    practice of religion, and, among other things, to the
    keeping holy of Sundays and holy days. Let him learn to
    reverence and love holy Church, the common Mother of us
    all; and hence to obey the precepts of the Church, and
    to frequent the sacraments, since they are the means
    ordained by God for obtaining forgiveness of sin and fox
    leading a holy life.

58. The foundations of the organization being thus laid in
    religion, We next proceed to make clear the relations of
    the members one to another, in order that they may live
    together in concord and go forward prosperously and with
    good results. The offices and charges of the society
    should be apportioned for the good of the society
    itself, and in such mode that difference in degree or
    standing should not interfere with unanimity and
    good-will. It is most important that office bearers be
    appointed with due prudence and discretion, and each
    one's charge carefully mapped out, in order that no
    members may suffer harm. The common funds must be
    administered with strict honesty, in such a way that a
    member may receive assistance in proportion to his
    necessities. The rights and duties of the employers, as
    compared with the rights and duties of the employed,
    ought to be the subject of careful consideration. Should
    it happen that either a master or a workman believes
    himself injured, nothing would be more desirable than
    that a committee should be appointed, composed of
    reliable and capable members of the association, whose
    duty would be, conformably with the rules of the
    association, to settle the dispute. Among the several
    purposes of a society, one should be to try to arrange
    for a continuous supply of work at all times and
    seasons; as well as to create a fund out of which the
    members may be effectually helped in their needs, not
    only in the cases of accident, but also in sickness, old
    age, and distress.

59. Such rules and regulations, if willingly obeyed by all,
    will sufficiently ensure the well being of the less
    well-to-do; whilst such mutual associations among
    Catholics are certain to be productive in no small
    degree of prosperity to the State. Is it not rash to
    conjecture the future from the past. Age gives way to
    age, but the events of one century are wonderfully like
    those of another, for they are directed by the
    providence of God, who overrules the course of history
    in accordance with His purposes in creating the race of
    man. We are told that it was cast as a reproach on the
    Christians in the early ages of the Church that the
    greater number among them had to live by begging or by
    labor. Yet, destitute though they were of wealth and
    influence, they ended by winning over to their side the
    favor of the rich and the good-will of the powerful.
    They showed themselves industrious, hard-working,
    assiduous, and peaceful, ruled by justice, and, above
    all, bound together in brotherly love. In presence of
    such mode of life and such example, prejudice gave way,
    the tongue of malevolence was silenced, and the lying
    legends of ancient superstition little by little yielded
    to Christian truth.

60. At the time being, the condition of the working classes
    is the pressing question of the hour, and nothing can be
    of higher interest to all classes of the State than that
    it should be rightly and reasonably settled. But it will
    be easy for Christian working men to solve it aright if
    they will form associations, choose wise guides, and
    follow on the path which with so much advantage to
    themselves and the common weal was trodden by their
    fathers before them. Prejudice, it is true, is mighty,
    and so is the greed of money; but if the sense of what
    is just and rightful be not deliberately stifled, their
    fellow citizens are sure to be won over to a kindly
    feeling towards men whom they see to be in earnest as
    regards their work and who prefer so unmistakably right
    dealing to mere lucre, and the sacredness of duty to
    every other consideration.

61. And further great advantage would result from the state
    of things We are describing; there would exist so much
    more ground for hope, and likelihood, even, of recalling
    to a sense of their duty those working men who have
    either given up their faith altogether, or whose lives
    are at variance with its precepts. Such men feel in most
    cases that they have been fooled by empty promises and
    deceived by false pretexts. They cannot but perceive
    that their grasping employers too often treat them with
    great inhumanity and hardly care for them outside the
    profit their labor brings; and if they belong to any
    union, it is probably one in which there exists, instead
    of charity and love, that intestine strife which ever
    accompanies poverty when unresigned and unsustained by
    religion. Broken in spirit and worn down in body, how
    many of them would gladly free themselves from such
    galling bondage! But human respect, or the dread of
    starvation, makes them tremble to take the step. To such
    as these Catholic associations are of incalculable
    service, by helping them out of their difficulties,
    inviting them to companionship and receiving the
    returning wanderers to a haven where they may securely
    find repose.

62. We have now laid before you, venerable brethren, both
    who are the persons and what are the means whereby this
    most arduous question must be solved. Every one should
    put his hand to the work which falls to his share, and
    that at once and straightaway, lest the evil which is
    already so great become through delay absolutely beyond
    remedy. Those who rule the commonwealths should avail
    themselves of the laws and institutions of the country;
    masters and wealthy owners must be mindful of their
    duty; the working class, whose interests are at stake,
    should make every lawful and proper effort; and since
    religion alone, as We said at the beginning, can avail
    to destroy the evil at its root, all men should rest
    persuaded that main thing needful is to re-establish
    Christian morals, apart from which all the plans and
    devices of the wisest will prove of little avail.

63. In regard to the Church, her cooperation will never be
    found lacking, be the time or the occasion what it may;
    and she will intervene with all the greater effect in
    proportion as her liberty of action is the more
    unfettered. Let this be carefully taken to heart by
    those whose office it is to safeguard the public
    welfare. Every minister of holy religion must bring to
    the struggle the full energy of his mind and all his
    power of endurance. Moved by your authority, venerable
    brethren, and quickened by your example, they should
    never cease to urge upon men of every class, upon the
    high-placed as well as the lowly, the Gospel doctrines
    of Christian life; by every means in their power they
    must strive to secure the good of the people; and above
    all must earnestly cherish in themselves, and try to
    arouse in others, charity, the mistress and the queen of
    virtues. For, the happy results we all long for must be
    chiefly brought about by the plenteous outpouring of
    charity; of that true Christian charity which is the
    fulfilling of the whole Gospel law, which is always
    ready to sacrifice itself for others' sake, and is man's
    surest antidote against worldly pride and immoderate
    love of self; that charity whose office is described and
    whose Godlike features are outlined by the Apostle
    St. Paul in these words: "Charity is patient, is
    kind,... seeketh not her own,... suffereth all
    things,... endureth all things."

64. On each of you, venerable brethren, and on your clergy
    and people, as an earnest of God's mercy and a mark of
    Our affection, we lovingly in the Lord bestow the
    apostolic benediction.

Given at St. Peter's, in Rome, the fifteenth day of May,
1891, the fourteenth year of Our Pontificate.

**LEO XIII.**

[^1]: Romans. 10:12.
