# Preface

My inherited principles of Non-Resistance, which seem as
essential to me as the breath of life and paramount to all
others, and filial affection have made me yield to the
urgent requests of many friends to state as best I may what
part a belief in Non-Resistance played in the life of my
father, William Lloyd Garrison. His undying faith in the
invincible power of Non-Resistance, more than all else, in
my estimation, entitles him to the gratitude of his
fellow-men. "Doing evil that good may come," he ever
regarded as a false and pernicious doctrine. Therefore, his
language had, he felt, to be "as harsh as truth and as
uncompromising as justice." After one of Mr. Garrison's
impassioned utterances, a warm sympathizer said to him, "Oh
my friend, do try to moderate your indignation and keep more
cool; why you are all on fire." Mr. Garrison replied, "I
have need to be all on fire, for I have mountains of ice
about me to melt." This is perhaps more true of
Non-Resistance than of almost any other cause.

It was early given to Mr. Garrison to put his Non-Resistant
principles to the test in a way that left no question as to
his sincerity or as to his readiness to face death for his
beliefs. On October 21, 1835, a "broadcloth" mob consisting
of "5000 gentlemen of property and standing" gathered in
Boston to tar and feather the English Abolitionist, George
Thompson. Unable to find Mr. Thompson, who had yielded to
Mr. Garrison's urgent request to leave the city, the mob
surrounded the building in which Mr. Garrison was addressing
the meeting of the "Female Anti-Slavery Society" although he
had been warned in advance and urged to avoid danger. "In
the middle of the uproar," my father later wrote, "an
Abolition brother whose mind had not been previously settled
on the peace question, in his anguish and alarm for my
safety, and in view of the helplessness of the civil
authority, said: 'I must henceforth repudiate the principle
of non-resistance. When the civil arm is powerless, my own
rights are trodden in the dust, and the lives of my friends
are put in imminent peril by ruffians, I will hereafter
prepare to defend myself and them at all hazards.' Putting
my hand upon his shoulder, I said, 'Hold, my dear brother!
You know not what spirit you are of. This is the trial of
our faith, and the test of our endurance. Of what value or
utility are the principles of peace and forgiveness, if we
may repudiate them in the hour of peril and suffering? Do
you wish to become like one of those violent and
bloodthirsty men who are seeking my life? Shall we give blow
for blow, and array sword against sword? God forbid! I will
perish sooner than raise my hand against any man, even in
self-defence, and let none of my friends resort to violence
for my protection. If my life be taken, the cause of
emancipation will not suffer. God reigns---his throne is
undisturbed by this storm---he will make the wrath of man to
praise him, and the remainder he will restrain---his
omnipotence will at length be victorious.'"

Had weapons been used in my father's defence, death would
certainly have been his portion. As it was the mob placed a
rope around him and dragged him through the streets,
intending to lynch him, until he was rescued by the Mayor of
Boston and a strong force of police. It was stated by
eyewitnesses that Mr. Garrison's composure was never ruffled
during this soul-searching experience.

To this summary of my father's views I have added a sketch
of his personality, as I, the last of his children, knew it.
Finally, I wish to record in this volume the words of Count
Tolstoy in which he affirms that it was from my father that
he learned of the doctrine of Non-Resistance which he at
once embraced, so that it is indissolubly connected with his
name.

**Fanny Garrison Villard.**

*New York, June, 1924.*

# William Lloyd Garrison in His Daughter's Eyes, by Fanny Garrison Villard

To put on paper one's recollections of an adored parent is
difficult. Yet it seems to me that a picture of my father's
rare personal and family life from my point of view may be
worth recording. It was an exceptional one because of the
happiness and joy which pervaded it even during the darkest
days of the anti-slavery struggle. Large means my father
never had and the care of his considerable family might well
have hampered his spirit had it not been so joyous and
serene, so fortified in the right, so certain of the
eventual triumph of the good in the world.

Nowhere, in fact, did my father's calm temperament and sweet
disposition make itself more felt than in the home circle.
No matter how agitated and exciting his experiences in the
outside world might be, nor how uncertain his tenure of
life, he forgot it all when surrounded by his wife and
children. No man was ever blessed with a more faithful,
devoted wife; her burdens were many, but were gladly borne
for his sake. My father's testimony was that she made his
home a heaven on earth. The care of the children, which in
those days included the making of all their garments at
home, devolved wholly upon her, the family means affording
her only one servant. Besides that, her house was a hotel,
for all Abolitionists who came to Boston were made welcome
under her roof, and that was one of her great contributions
to the cause of the slave. It was, in fact, the only house
in the city which was open to them. What would she have done
without my father's help? He it was who carried the water
upstairs when water was a luxury; chopped the wood, made the
fires, blacked the boots, or, in case of need, made the
coffee, all the while singing. But his shining quality was
that of nurse, for his love of children was unbounded and
his care of them most skilful. He used to say: "I believe
that I was born into the world to take care of babies" and
the little ones were drawn to him as if by a magnet.

In this way he smoothed and lightened my mother's
perplexities, comforting her when she feared the children
might not be worthy of their training, making light of her
anxieties, and helping her at every step. Her splendid
health and quick sense of the ludicrous made her duties
lighter than they otherwise could have been and her
beautiful presence made our home especially attractive. On
account of her injured arm it was my father who prepared the
food for the children, giving himself no time whatever for
eating until their wants were all supplied. At table he was
a most delightful host, full of conversation adapted to the
guests, and his watchful eye never failed to observe and
supply their needs. In short, it was a necessity of his
nature to be of service to some one.

He dearly loved to take strolls in the suburbs of Boston
with friends and to point out the sites that were "Just the
place for a hotel" because the views were so beautiful. In
whatever part of the world he was he found numberless fine
spots for building and regretted that they should be
overlooked, so many people might be enjoying them. He loved
nature not less, but human beings more, and the country
alone would have been dull and uninteresting to him, in
spite of his keen appreciation of a fine landscape and
fertile fields. In a mountainous region he felt great
exaltation of spirit. Books of poetry he always had at hand
and frequently repeated to us fine passages from them. As he
possessed a peculiarly sympathetic voice the lofty
sentiments he so delighted to utter never failed to stir his
hearers. Newspaper reading absorbed much of his time, and he
was never happier than when seated in his dressing-gown
before a pile of papers, scissors in hand. My mother's sense
of order was always disturbed by the heaps of papers that
were thrown upon the floor, but she never complained and
even saved, where she might have destroyed. To her
forbearance we owe much of the material used by my brothers
in the biography of my father. His handwriting was very
handsome and so plain that he who ran could read.
Unfortunately he held his pen stiffly, and the mechanical
drudgery of writing made him dread to take one in his hand.
This increased his habit of procrastination, for which his
wife gently reproved him, and the wonder is that he, after
all, wrote so voluminously.

It tried him to have communications for the *Liberator*
written, as he expressed it, "in hieroglyphics," and he was
patience itself with the resulting bad proofs and pitied the
compositors who had to set from such manuscripts. It puzzled
him, however, to account for the fact that even his own
clear copy was sometimes made into "pie," as the saying is.
All at the office testified to the fact that he was
gentleness and consideration itself, no matter how great the
trials, how tired and exhausted he might feel, or how
severely his back ached from bending over the forms. How
happy he would have been had he been able to dictate to a
secretary, or to use a typewriter! Even his letters to
members of his own family did not escape a certain
formality, owing to his careful habits of thought. He once
expressed himself thus: "He who attempts to appear before
the public as a reformer, should so live that all his
actions can be searched with candles and not found wanting."
When writing a speech or resolutions, his first desire was
to make them plain and simple, and thus powerful as appeals
to the heart and the understanding. As a speaker there were
occasions when, inspired by a great theme, he took his rank
as an orator. One felt that it would have been easy for him
to die for the sake of principle, but impossible for him to
swerve a hair's breadth from the line of duty.

I was hardly more than an infant when my father came to my
crib to give me a good night kiss. He said: "What a nice
warm bed my darling has! The poor little slave child is not
so fortunate and is torn from its mother's arms. How good my
darling ought to be!" Thus early, I was taught the lesson of
pity for those less favored than myself and so tenderly that
it remains after the lapse of more than three-quarters of a
century, a moving appeal to me. I recall that I used to
stand on my father's shoulder, holding fast to his bald
head, while I learned the names of the great and good men
and women whose pictures adorned the walls of our library.
Soon, I could point them out correctly for the edification
of the family and friends. Sometimes I was permitted to sit
on a high stool at *The Liberator* office where my father's
paper was printed and play with the spaces at the
compositor's desk, a very enjoyable pastime I thought.

As my hands were exceptionally cold in winter, I often
warmed them on my father's bald head. For a long time I
could not understand why he said: "You come to my incendiary
head, my darling, to warm your cold hands?" One day he said
to me: "I met a man this morning who thought that I had
horns." I was greatly puzzled and did my best to find them.
To many friends he said: "I love all my children best,
especially Fanny." I realize more than ever before the
happiness that was mine of being an only daughter. Once I
was asked at school if I had been baptized. Not
understanding the question, I inquired of my father when I
reached home if such was the case, to which he replied: "No,
my darling, you have had a good bath every morning and that
is a great deal better." This, I innocently told my
school-mates the next day.

*The Liberator* went to press on Wednesday, and as my father
was then so busy that he did not take time to leave the
office for luncheon, it was my privilege to carry a lunch to
him. On such occasions he would always say: "Now you have
brought it to me, my darling, I must eat it."

My father's call to his children on a Saturday evening to
get *The Liberator* "in advance of the mail"---that is, to
read proof with him---was always answered cheerfully by us.
When it was my turn, I was frequently rewarded by being
given a story to read---often in a supplement of the
Portland (Maine) *Transcript*---sometimes, I must confess,
much more interesting to me than the pages of *The
Liberator*.

The general impression of my father's critics was that life
under such conditions as ours must be gloomy, but in
reality, there never was a gayer or happier family. My
father's optimistic nature and keen sense of humor could
always be relied upon and in times of financial stress he
would put his arm around my anxious mother, and walk up and
down the room with her, saying: "My dear, the Lord will
provide."

Musical training was never vouchsafed him and he could only
pick out a melody on the piano with one hand. Therefore, he
was delighted when I was able to play accompaniments for
him. He liked to stand behind me and beat time gently on my
shoulder when singing his favorite hymns. Love of music was
indeed a vital part of my father's being. His voice waked
the household in the morning with song and made the day seem
bright and cheery, though it were ever so stormy and gloomy
outside. As a boy he sang well and could follow, as he said,
"any flute," and he had a correct ear. Anything with a
martial ring to it found an echo in his breast. When asked
how a Non-Resistant could like warlike music, he said: "It
is just as applicable to moral warfare and the army of the
Lord." When I was taught to play classical music on the
piano, he thought that I ought to give more time to what
would affect the hearts of people in general. Afterwards,
however, his taste became cultivated and he finally took
great delight in good concerts, enjoying Von Bülow and
Rubinstein and especially the women pianists, Anna Mehlig
and Mme. Essipoff; also the violinists, Ole Bull,
Wieniawski, Camillo Urso, and Wilhelmy. At the time when the
Monster Peace Jubilee concerts of 1869 and 1873 were held in
Boston, he was so full of enthusiasm and appreciation of
them that he attended almost every performance.

The company that frequented our house was so delightful that
I never realized until I was fully grown that my father's
devotion to the cause of the slave made him socially
ostracized. I consider it great good fortune to have
listened to discussions on important reform movements of the
day by such men as Wendell Phillips, Edmund Quincy, the
saintly Samuel J. May and his cousin Samuel May and Theodore
Parker---and such women as Maria Weston Chapman---the grande
dame of the Anti-Slavery cause---Lucy Stone, Susan B.
Anthony and the gifted Grimke sisters from South
Carolina---all pioneers in both Anti-Slavery and
Suffrage---as well as hosts of other interesting people. To
us came advocates of Temperance, of the Abolition of
Slavery, of the Woman's Rights Movement, Free Religious
Thought, Prison Reform and Non-Resistance---which stood on a
far higher plane than the Pacifism of today. Many
distinguished reformers from Great Britain paid homage to my
father and were entertained at our home, always simply, as
though members of the family. It would be impossible to
express the joy that my four brothers and I felt in such an
environment. My youngest brother on being put to bed early
when guests were coming told my mother between sobs, that it
was not the supper that he cared for, but the conversation;
Anti-Slavery meetings were our theatre and opera,
Anti-Slavery debates, meat and drink to us. What we learned
was an undying devotion to the principles of justice and
humanity, never-to-be abandoned, come what may. It enabled
me, when pointed out at school as the daughter of an
"infidel," to glory in the accusation.

I recall the visit of a stranger to my father, who, after
introducing himself, said: "Mr. Garrison, if you have
immediate emancipation you will have chaos." I looked at my
father and wondered what his reply would be. He seemed
absolutely serene and answered: "That is no concern of mine.
I know that slavery is wrong and freedom is right, but what
you will deprecate, my dear sir, will be, not the results of
freedom, but of slavery." I heard my father say during the
Civil War that if slavery went down in blood this nation
would realize that there is such a thing as retributive
justice, for two wrongs can never make a right. He regarded
human life as sacred and inviolable under all circumstances,
and he carried on the struggle for Emancipation on the basis
of Non-Resistance, losing many adherents in consequence of
it, but gaining others who shared his firm belief that we
should never do evil that good may come.

I had the privilege of being present with my father at the
great celebration in Music Hall, Boston, of that happy
event, the signing of the Proclamation of Emancipation by
Abraham Lincoln in June, 1864. When my father saw Lincoln in
Washington after attending the National Convention for the
nomination of President and Vice-President, Mr. Lincoln told
him that he never could have written the Proclamation of
Emancipation had Mr. Garrison and his coadjutors not made
the public sentiment upon which he, Lincoln, had to rely for
his support.

Time had brought about a complete change in the public mind
with regard to my beloved parent. He himself declared that:
"The truth is, he who commences any reform which at last
becomes one of transcendent importance and is crowned with
victory, is always ill-judged and unfairly estimated. At the
outset he is looked upon with contempt and treated in the
most opprobrious manner as a wild fanatic or a dangerous
disorganizer. In due time the cause grows and advances to
its sure triumph, and, in proportion as it nears the goal,
the popular estimate of his character changes, till,
finally, excessive panegyric is substituted for outrageous
abuse. The praise on the one hand and the defamation on the
other, are equally unmerited. In the clear light of reason,
it will be seen that he simply stood up to discharge a duty
which he owed to his God, to his fellow-men, to the land of
his nativity."

The photographs and portraits of my father give one no idea
of his mobile countenance. He used to say: "This is fame---a
poor portrait and a worse bust------"but the bust of him
made by Anne Whitney was very good. At the time when the
City Fathers of Boston decided to erect a statue of him,
Miss Whitney competed for it and won the prize. It is
difficult to believe in these enlightened days that when it
was discovered that the prize-winner was a woman she was not
permitted to make the statue, but such was the case. Olin
Warner was the accepted sculptor and the statue that was
erected on Commonwealth Avenue is a travesty of my father.

My husband, Henry Villard, speaks of him in his memoirs as
follows:

"Mr. Garrison's exterior was a complete surprise to me. His
public character as the most determined, fearless
Anti-Slavery champion had so impressed me, as it did most
people, that I had supposed his outward appearance must be
in keeping with it. In other words, I had expected to see a
fighting figure of powerful build, with thick hair, full
beard and fiery defiant eyes. It seemed almost ludicrous to
behold a man of middle size, completely bald and clean
shaven, with kindly eyes behind spectacles, and instead of a
fierce, an entirely benignant expression. He appeared,
indeed, more like the typical New England minister of the
Gospel than the relentless agitator that he was. The inner
man corresponded fully to the outer one. He was forbearing,
and mildness itself, in manner and speech."

Miss Harriet Martineau records her first meeting with my
father thus: "His aspect put to flight in an instant what
prejudices his slanderers had raised in me. I was wholly
taken by surprise. It was a countenance glowing with health
and wholly expressive of purity, animation and gentleness."

She further said: "One day in Michigan two friends (who
happened to be Abolitionists) and I were taking a drive with
the Governor of the State who was talking of some recent
commotion, on the slavery question. 'What is Garrison like?'
said he. 'Ask Miss M.,' said the other. I was asked
accordingly and my answer was that I thought Garrison the
most bewitching personage that I had met in the United
States. The testimony of his personal friends, the closest
watchers of his life, may safely be appealed to as to the
charms of his domestic manners. Garrison gaily promised me
that he would come over whenever his work is done in the
United States. I believe that it would be safe to promise
him a hundred thousand welcomes as warm as mine."

On the occasion of my father's first visit to England where
he arrived in June, 1833, just at the crisis of the
Anti-Slavery cause there, his mission was to expose the work
of the American Colonization Society to the friends of the
colored people in London and elsewhere in Great Britain.
Mr. William Green described him at that time as "a young man
not yet twenty-eight, without means or social standing or a
numerous following; despised, hated, hunted with a price on
his head; armed only with the blessings of an outcast race
and the credentials of an insignificant body of 'fanatics'
who was to present himself before the honorable, powerful
and world-famous advocates of British Emancipation---before
Clarkson and Wilberforce, Macaulay and Buxton."

After arriving in London my father received an invitation to
take breakfast with Sir Fowell Buxton which he gladly
accepted and reached the house at the appointed time. When
his name was announced Mr. Buxton inquired somewhat
dubiously: "Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr. Garrison
of Boston in the United States ?" The latter replied "Yes,
Sir, I am he, and I am here in accordance with your
invitation." Lifting up his hands Sir Fowell exclaimed:
"Why, my dear sir, I thought that you were a black man!"
Referring to this episode my father said that that was the
only compliment that he cared to remember or to tell, for
Mr. Buxton somehow or other supposed that no white American
could plead for those in bondage as he had done, therefore
he must be black.

My father was of medium height and he became bald while
still a young man. The remnant of his hair was like fine
silk and quite black, turning gray only late in life. His
eyes were large and full, of a hazel color, hidden somewhat
by glasses, but giving an expression of great benevolence to
his countenance, and his nose was strong and well shaped.
The mouth with its firm deep lines was the feature that
indicated the dauntless courage and iron will of the man who
stood almost alone when he began the agitation which ended
in the emancipation of the slaves. It gave to his face its
intense earnestness of purpose; yet it was wonderfully
mobile and the slightest movement of the lips gave him the
kindest and sunniest of expressions. It was easy to note the
changes of his ever-varying countenance on his smoothly
shaven face. His complexion in youth was singularly white,
his cheeks "like roses in the snow," as one of his old
friends told me. He had, as long as he lived, a fine color
in spite of the fact that he was compelled to keep very
irregular hours because of his labors in the printing office
and his lecturing experiences. He held himself erect and
walked with a firm, brisk step, all his movements indicating
alertness and vigor of mind and body.

It seems to me that it was my father's marvellously
sympathetic nature, his complete forgetfulness of self, that
drew all hearts to him. Once admitted to his presence,
friend or foe felt the magic of his winning voice,
expressive of a heart overflowing with kindness, and
prejudices melted away before his genial smile. This
endeared him to all who came in contact with him and he
invariably touched responsive chords in his listeners, were
they of high or low degree.

The winter of 1867 m Y husband and I spent in Paris, and in
the spring my father came over as a delegate from the
American Freedman's Commission to a Paris Anti-Slavery
Conference. It was convened by the British and Foreign
Anti-Slavery Society. Afterwards he visited his numerous
friends in England who had given him unfailing support
during the days of slavery. I had the happiness of joining
him there, together with my brother Frank, and attending the
public breakfast given to my father in London on June 29,
1867, at St. James' Hall by some of the most distinguished
Englishmen of the time. John Bright presided, the Duke of
Argyle made a memorable address, and Earl Russell improved
the occasion to make open amends to the United States for
his attitude during the Rebellion, when he allowed the
Alabama to leave a British port to prey upon American
shipping. The final address was made by John Stuart
Mill---to me the culmination of that brilliant and moving
occasion. He pointed out two lessons from my father's
career. The first was; u Aim at something great; aim at
things which are difficult (and there is no great thing that
is not difficult) . If you aim at something noble and
succeed in it, you will generally find that you have
succeeded not in that alone. A hundred other good and noble
things which you never dreamed of will have been
accomplished by the way." He also said that "though our best
directed efforts may often seem wasted and lost, nothing
coming of them that can be pointed to and distinctly
identified as a definite gain to humanity; though this may
happen ninety-nine times in every hundred, the hundredth
time the result may be so great that we had never dared to
hope for it and should have regarded him who had predicted
it to us as sanguine beyond the bounds of mental sanity."

My father's reply to the eloquent addresses made on that
occasion was wholly spontaneous and ended thus: "Now in
parting let me say, we must not allow ourselves to be
divided---England from America, America from England. By
every consideration under heaven, let us resolve to keep the
peace. If we have old grudges, let them be thrown to the
winds. Let there be peace---a true and just peace---peace by
forbearance---peace by generous concession---for the sake of
the cause of mankind, and that together England and America
may lead the nations of the world to freedom and glory.
There is your country's flag, there is mine. Let them be
blended."

My father's Non-Resistant principles were fervently embraced
by all his children except his eldest son, George Thompson
Garrison, who, when the 54th and 55th Massachusetts
regiments were formed of colored men in the Civil War,
joined the former as a lieutenant. Before the final step was
taken my father sent the following letter to him on June ii
? 1863. It indicates more than all else, perhaps, his spirit
of tolerance and respect for the views of another---even
those of a beloved son who differed from the teaching of his
father on so vital a matter as war: "Though I could have
wished that you had been able understandingly and truly to
adopt those principles of peace which are so sacred and
divine to my soul, yet you will bear me witness that I have
not laid a straw in your way to prevent your acting up to
your own highest convictions of duty; for nothing would be
gained, but much lost, to have you violate these. Still, I
tenderly hope that you will once more seriously review the
whole matter before making the irrevocable decision...."

Love, they say, is blind, but love for our father was
something more than that affection which commonly exists
between parents and children. It was called forth by a life
so pure, so tender, so earnest, so full of compassion and so
joyous, that being part of it, we regarded him almost as one
who had strayed from heaven to earth. Each one of us was
morally stimulated by his fidelity to principle, his
never-failing generosity and touching forgetfulness of self;
and this not only because of his devotion to many good,
though unpopular, causes, but even more for the reason that
these exceptional qualities were ours to emulate in the
daily round of our home life. A greater legacy, a richer
moral inheritance, I cannot believe was ever bestowed upon
children by both parents than that which was so abundantly
ours.

We could not rise to the height of such a father, but we
kept, as a solemn trust, his clear vision of unbounded love
and sympathy for those suffering from cruelty and injustice.
If it were only possible to give an approximate idea of so
remarkable and lovely a personality and the secret of its
charm my self-imposed task would be easy. But any attempt to
do so must necessarily fall short of the truth, however
imperishable the memory of it.

# William Lloyd Garrison on Non-Resistance

As early as August 30, 1838, Mr. Garrison wrote to his
intimate friend and coadjutor, Samuel J. May, of Leicester,
Mass. as follows in regard to the peace convention to be
held in Boston on Sept. 18-20 of that year:

"We shall probably find no difficulty in bringing a large
majority of the Convention to set their seal of condemnation
upon the present militia system and its ridiculous and
pernicious accompaniments. They will also, I presume,
reprobate all wars, defensive as well as offensive. They
will not agree so cordially as to the inviolability of human
life. But few, I think, will be ready to concede that
Christianity forbids the use of physical force in the
punishment of evil-doers; yet nothing is plainer to my
understanding or more congenial to the feelings of my heart.

"... I feel the excellence and sublimity of that precept
which bids me pray for those who despitefully use me; and
that other precept which enjoins upon me when smitten on the
one cheek to turn the other also.

"... We degrade our spirits in a brutal conflict. To talk of
courts of justice and of punishing evil and disobedient
men---of protecting the weak and avenging the wronged by a
posse comitatus or a company of soldiers---has a taking
sound but it is hollow in my ears."

A part of the "Declaration of Sentiments" adopted by this
Peace Convention in Boston, on September 18th, 19th and
20th, 1838, which was written by Mr. Garrison at a single
sitting on the forenoon of the 20th of September is as
follows:

"Assembled in Convention, from various sections of the
American Union, for the promotion of peace on earth and
good-will among men, we, the undersigned, regard it as due
to ourselves, to the cause which we love, to the country in
which we live, and to the world, to publish a Declaration,
expressive of the principles we cherish, the purposes we aim
to accomplish, and the measures we shall adopt to carry
forward the work of peaceful, universal reformation.

"Our country is the world, our countrymen are all mankind.
We love the land of our nativity only as we love all other
lands. The interests, rights, liberties of American citizens
are no more dear to us than are those of the whole human
race. Hence, we can allow no appeal to patriotism, to
revenge any national insult or injury. The Prince of Peace,
under whose stainless banner we rally, came not to destroy,
but to save, even the worst of enemies.

"We conceive that if a nation has no right to defend itself
against foreign enemies, or to punish its invaders, no
individual possesses that right in his own case. The unit
cannot be of greater importance than the aggregate. If one
man may take life, to obtain or defend his rights, the same
license must necessarily be granted to the communities,
states and nations. If he may use a dagger or a pistol, they
may employ cannon, bombshells, land and naval forces. The
means of self-preservation must be in proportion to the
magnitude of interests at stake and the number of lives
exposed to destruction. But if a rapacious and bloodthirsty
soldiery, thronging these shores from abroad, with intent to
commit rapine and destroy life, may not be resisted by the
people or magistracy, then ought no resistance to be offered
to domestic troublers of the public peace or of private
security. No obligation can rest upon Americans to regard
foreigners as more sacred in their persons than themselves,
or to give them a monopoly of wrong-doing with impunity.

"The dogma that all the governments of the world are
approvingly ordained of God, and that the powers that be in
the United States, in Russia, in Turkey, are in accordance
with His will, is not less absurd than impious. It makes the
impartial Author of human freedom and equality unequal and
tyrannical.

"We register our testimony, not only against all wars,
whether offensive or defensive, but all preparations for
war; against every naval ship, every arsenal, every
fortification; against the militia system and a standing
army; against all military chieftains and soldiers; against
all monuments commemorative of victory over a fallen foe,
all trophies won in battle, all celebrations in honor of
military or naval exploits; against all appropriations for
the defence of a nation by force and arms, on the part of
any legislative body; against every edict of government
requiring of its subjects military service. Hence we deem it
unlawful to bear arms or to hold a military office.

"The history of mankind is crowded with evidences proving
that physical coercion is not adapted to moral regeneration;
that the sinful dispositions of men can be subdued only by
love; that evil can be exterminated from the earth only by
goodness; that it is not safe to rely upon an arm of flesh,
upon man whose breath is in his nostrils, to preserve us
from harm; that there is great security in being gentle,
harmless, long-suffering, and abundant in mercy; that it is
only the meek who shall inherit the earth, for the violent
who resort to the sword are destined to perish with the
sword. Hence as a measure of sound policy---of safety to
property, life, and liberty---of public quietude and private
enjoyment---as well as on the ground of allegiance to Him
who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, we cordially adopt
the Non-Resistance principle, being confident that it
provides for all possible consequences, will ensure all
things needful to us, is armed with omnipotent power, and
must ultimately triumph over every assailing force.

"If we abide by our principles, it is impossible for us to
be disorderly, or plot treason, or participate in any evil
work; we shall submit to every ordinance of man; obey all
the requirements of Government, except such as we deem
contrary to the commands of the gospel, and in no case
resist the operation of the law, except by meekly submitting
to the penalty of disobedience.

"But, while we shall adhere to the doctrine of
Non-Resistance and passive submission to enemies, we
purpose, in a moral and spiritual sense, to speak and act
boldly; to assail iniquity, in high places and in low
places; to apply our principles to all existing civil,
political, legal and ecclesiastical institutions.

"It appears to us a self-evident truth, that, whatever the
gospel is designed to destroy at any period of the world,
being contrary to it, ought now to be abandoned.

"We expect to prevail through the foolishness of
preaching---striving to commend ourselves unto every man's
conscience, in the sight of God. From the press we shall
promulgate our sentiments as widely as practicable. We shall
endeavor to secure the cooperation of all persons, of
whatever name or sect. The triumphant progress of the cause
of Temperance and of Abolition in our land, through the
instrumentality of benevolent and voluntary associations,
encourages us to combine our own means and efforts for the
promotion of a still greater cause. Hence, we shall employ
lecturers, circulate tracts and publications, form
societies, and petition our State and national governments,
in relation to the subject of *universal peace*. It will be
our leading object to devise ways and means for effecting a
radical change in the views, feelings and practices of
society, respecting the sinfulness of war and the treatment
of enemies.

"In entering upon the great work before us, we are not
unmindful that, in its prosecution, we may be called to test
our sincerity, even as in a fiery ordeal. It may subject us
to insult, outrage, suffering, yea, even death itself. We
anticipate no small amount of misconception,
misrepresentation, calumny.

"Firmly relying upon the certain and universal triumph of
the sentiments contained in this Declaration, however
formidable may be the opposition arrayed against them---in
solemn testimony of our faith in their divine origin---we
hereby affix our signatures to it; commending it to the
reason and conscience of mankind, giving ourselves no
anxiety as to what may befall us."

On another occasion Mr. Garrison said of this Declaration:
"This instrument contemplates nothing, repudiates nothing,
but the spirit of violence in thought, word and deed.
Whatever, therefore, may be done without provoking that
spirit, and in accordance with the spirit of disinterested
benevolence, is not touched or alluded to in the instrument.
The sum total of affirmation is this---that, we are
resolved, come what may, as Christians, to have
long-suffering toward those who may despitefully use and
persecute us---to pray for them---to forgive them in all
cases. This is the head and front of our offending---nothing
more, nothing less."

Referring to the work of this convention, Mr. Garrison wrote
as follows: "Our Non-Resistance Convention is over, and the
peace and blessing of heaven have attended our
deliberations. Such a mass of free mind as was brought
together I have never seen before in any one assembly. 'Not
many mighty,' 'not many rich,' 'not many honorable' were
found among us---of course; but there was much talent, and a
great deal of soul. Not a single set speech was made by
anyone, but everyone spoke in a familiar manner, just as
though we constituted but a mere social party."

As a matter of course, the new peace organization received
the condemnation of the religious press, with hardly an
exception, and especially that of the American Peace Society
and the New York Peace Society.

Replying to a correspondent Mr. Garrison declared that
"Non-Resistance is not a state of passivity, on the
contrary, it is a state of activity, ever fighting the good
fight of faith, ever foremost to assail unjust power, ever
struggling for 'liberty, equality, fraternity,' in no
national sense, but in a world-wide spirit. It is passive
only in this sense---that it will not return evil for evil,
nor give blow for blow, nor resort to murderous weapons for
protection or defense."

The author of the Declaration of Sentiments then asks "On
what are right and wrong dependent? On recorded
declarations? On ancient parchments or modern manuscripts?
On sacred books? No. Though every parchment, manuscript and
book in the world were given to the consuming fire, the loss
would not in the least affect the right or wrong of moral
actions. Truth and duty, the principle of justice and
equity, the obligations of mercy and brotherly kindness, are
older than all books, and more enduring than tablets of
stone...

"The question at issue is---war, its nature, tendencies,
results: war, whether in ancient or modern times, whether
under the Jewish or Christian dispensation; is it right? was
it ever justifiable?...

"Why should we go to a book to settle the character of war
when we could judge of it by its fruits?...

"War is as capable of moral analysis as slavery,
intemperance, licentiousness, or idolatry. It is not an
abstraction, which admits of doubt or uncertainty, but as
tangible as bombs, cannon, mangled corpses, smouldering
ruins, desolated towns and villages, rivers of blood. It is
substantially the same in all ages, and cannot change its
moral features. To trace it in all its ramifications is not
a difficult matter. In fact, nothing is more terribly
distinct than its career; it leaves its impress on
everything it touches, whether physical, mental, or moral.
Why, then, not look it in the face? Why look anywhere else?"

Mr. Garrison presided at a Non-Resistance Convention held in
Worcester on March 24 and 25, 1854, and drew up several
resolutions, one of them being the following:

"Resolved, that the plan of supporting governments by
tariffs and other indirect taxes, is a cunning contrivance
of tyrants to enable them to attain their ambitions and
bloody aims without exciting the alarm of the people by a
direct appeal to their pockets; therefore, one most potent
way to put an end to war and tyranny is to abolish all
tariffs and indirect taxes and substitute free trade and
direct taxation as the means of sustaining political
institutions."

In May, 1838, just after the dedication of Marlboro' Chapel,
which was founded in Boston "mainly by Abolitionists, upon
the rock of universal emancipation, and to advance the cause
of humanity and free discussion," Mr. Garrison wrote to
George W. Benson: "The spirit of mobocracy, like the
pestilence, is contagious; and Boston is once more ready to
re-enact the riotous scenes of 1835. The Marlboro' Chapel,
having just been completed, and standing in relation to our
cause just as did Pennsylvania Hall, is an object of
pro-slavery malevolence. Ever since my return, threats have
been given out that the Chapel should share the fate of the
Hall. Last evening was the time for its dedication; and, so
threatening was the aspect of things, four companies of
light infantry were ordered to be in readiness, each being
provided with 100 *ball* cartridges, to rush to the scene of
riot on the tolling of the bells. The lancers, a powerful
body of horsemen, were also in readiness. During the day
placards were posted at the corners of the streets,
denouncing the Abolitionists, and calling upon the citizens
to rally at the Chapel in the evening, in order to put them
down... Non-Resistance versus brickbats and bowie-knives.
Omnipotence against a worm of the dust. Divine law against
lynch law. How unequal!"

Commenting upon Henry Ward Beecher's statement that u there
are those who will scoff at the idea of holding a sword or a
rifle, in a Christian state of mind," Mr. Garrison wrote in
the *Liberator:* "We know not where to look for Christianity
if not to its founder; and, taking the record of his life
and death, of his teaching and example, we can discover
nothing which even remotely, under any conceivable
circumstances, justifies the use of the sword or rifle on
the part of his followers; on the contrary, we find nothing
but self-sacrifice, willing martyrdom (if need be), peace
and good-will and the prohibition of all retaliatory
feelings, enjoined upon all who would be his disciples. When
he said: 'Fear not those who kill the body,' he broke every
deadly weapon. When he said: 'My kingdom is not of this
world, else would my servants fight that I should not be
delivered to the Jews,' he plainly prohibited war in
self-defence and substituted martyrdom therefore. When he
said 'Love your enemies,' he did not mean 'Kill them if they
go too far.' When he said, while expiring on the cross:
'Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do,' he
did not treat them as"a herd of buffaloes," but as poor,
misguided and lost men. We believe in his philosophy; we
accept his instruction; we are thrilled by his example; we
rejoice in his fidelity."

At the New England Convention in Boston on May 26, 1858,
where Thomas Wentworth Higginson and Theodore Parker
expressed their opinion that the slavery question could be
settled only by bloodshed, Mr. Garrison, though he had long
considered such a solution inevitable, deplored the
rejection of Non-Resistance principles on the part of the
Abolitionists: "When the antislavery cause was launched," he
said, "it was baptized in the spirit of peace. We proclaimed
to the country and the world that the weapons of our warfare
were not carnal, but spiritual, and we believed them to be
mighty through God to the pulling down even of the
stronghold of slavery; and for several years great moral
power accompanied our cause wherever presented. Alas in the
course of the fearful developments of the Slave Power, and
its continued aggressions on the rights of the people of the
North, in my judgment a sad change has come over the spirit
of anti-slavery men, generally speaking. We are growing more
and more warlike, more and more disposed to repudiate the
principles of peace, more and more disposed to talk about
'finding a joint in the neck of the tyrant,' and breaking
that neck, 'cleaving tyrants down from the crown to the
groin,' with the sword which is carnal, and so inflaming one
another with the spirit of violence and for a bloody work.
Just in proportion as this spirit prevails, I feel that our
moral power is departing and will depart. I say this not so
much as an Abolitionist as a man. I believe in the spirit of
peace, and in sole and absolute reliance on truth and the
application of it to the hearts and consciences of the
people. I do not believe that the weapons of liberty ever
have been, or ever can be, the weapons of despotism. I know
that those of despotism are the sword, the revolver, the
cannon, the bomb-shell; and, therefore, the weapons to which
tyrants cling, and upon which they depend, are not the
weapons for me, as a friend of liberty. I will not trust the
war spirit anywhere in the universe of God, because the
experience of six thousand years proves it not to be at all
reliable in such a struggle as ours...

"I pray you, Abolitionists, still to adhere to that truth.
Do not get impatient; do not become exasperated; do not
attempt any new political organization; do not make
yourselves familiar with the idea that blood must flow.
Perhaps blood will flow---God knows, I do not; but it shall
not flow through any counsel of mine. Much as I detest the
oppression exercised by the Southern slaveholder, he is a
man, sacred before me. He is a man, not to be harmed by my
hand nor with my consent. He is a man, who is grievously and
wickedly trampling upon the rights of his fellowmen; but all
I have to do with him is to rebuke his sin, to call him to
repentance, to leave him without excuse for his tyranny. He
is a sinner before God---a great sinner; yet, while I will
not cease reprobating his horrible injustice, I will let him
see that in my heart there is no desire to do him
harm---that I wish to bless him here, and bless him
everlastingly---and that I have no other weapon to wield
against him but the simple truth of God, which is the great
instrument for the overthrow of all iniquity, and the
salvation of the world."

At a meeting in Tremont Temple, held on the day of John
Brown's execution, December 2, 1859, Mr. Garrison said: "A
word upon the subject of Peace. I am a Non-Resistant---a
believer in the inviolability of human life, under all
circumstances; I, therefore, in the name of God, disarm John
Brown and every slave at the South. But I do not stop there;
if I did I should be a monster. I also disarm, in the name
of God, every slaveholder and tyrant in the world. For,
wherever that principle is adopted all fetters must
instantly melt, and there can be no oppressed and no
oppressor, in the nature of things.

"... But whenever there is a contest between the oppressed
and the oppressor--- the weapons being equal between the
parties---God knows that my heart must be with the oppressed
and always against the oppressor."

Many questions that are asked Non-Resistants today were put
to Mr. Garrison at the time of the Civil War. When thus
interrogated in regard to his peace views he replied: "This
question is exultingly put to the friends of peace and
Non-Resistance by those whose military ardor is now at a
white heat, as though it could not be satisfactorily
answered, and deserved nothing but ridicule. Our reply to it
is, that the peace principles are as beneficent and glorious
as ever and are neither disproved nor modified by anything
now transpiring in the country of a warlike character. If
they had been long since embraced and carried out by the
people, neither slavery nor war would now be filling the
land with violence and blood. Where they prevail no man is
in peril of life or liberty; where they are rejected, and
precisely to the extent they are rejected, neither life nor
liberty is secure. How their violation, under any
circumstances, is better than a faithful adherence to them,
we have not the moral vision to perceive. They are to be
held responsible for nothing which they do not legitimately
produce or sanction. As they neither produce nor sanction
any oppression or wrongdoing, but elevate the character,
control the passions and lead to the performance of all good
offices, they are not to be discarded for those of a hostile
character."

"What is war? Is it not the opposite of peace, as slavery is
of liberty, as sin is of holiness, as Belial is of Christ?
And is slavery sometimes to be enforced---is sin in cases of
emergency to be committed---is Belial occasionally to be
preferred to Christ, as circumstances may require? These are
grave questions, and the redemption of the world is
dependent on the answers that may be given to them.

"The better the object, the less need, the less
justification there is to behave as they do, who have one
that is altogether execrable. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
life for life, is not the way to redeem or bless our race.
Sword against sword, cannon against cannon, army against
army, is it thus that love and good-will are diffused
through the world, or that right conquers wrong? Why not,
then, seek by falsehood to counteract falsehood---by cruelty
to terminate cruelty---by sin to abolish sin? Can men gather
grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles ?"

"As for the governments of the world, all history shows that
they cannot be maintained, except by naval and military
power; that all their mandates being a dead letter without
such power to enforce them in the last extremity, are
virtually written in blood."

"To palliate crime is to be guilty of its perpetration. To
ask for a postponement of the case, till a more convenient
season, is to call for a suspension of the moral law, and to
assume that it is right to do wrong, under present
circumstances."

"The truth that we utter is impalpable, yet real: It cannot
be thrust down by brute force, nor pierced with a dagger,
nor bribed with gold, nor overcome by the application of a
coat of tar and feathers. The cause that we espouse is the
cause of human liberty, formidable to tyrants, and dear to
the oppressed, throughout the world---containing the
elements of immortality, sublime as heaven, and far-reaching
as eternity---embracing every interest that appertains to
the welfare of the bodies and souls of men, and sustained by
the omnipotence of the Lord Almighty. The principles that we
inculcate are those of equity, mercy, and love...

"Moral influence, when in vigorous exercise, is
irresistible. It has an immortal essence. It can no more be
trod out of existence by the iron foot of time, or by the
ponderous march of iniquity, than matter can be annihilated.
It may disappear for a time; but it lives in some shape or
other, in some place or other, and will rise with renovated
strength."

# *The Non-Resistant*

After the formation of The Non-Resistant Society on
September 18, 1838, and the appearance in the columns of the
Liberator of articles espousing the cause of Non-Resistance,
objections began to arise as to the use of the space of the
Liberator, for any subject not directly relating to slavery.
On November n, 1838, Anne Warren Weston, an ardent apostle
of both causes, wrote a letter to Mr. Garrison urging him to
edit a monthly paper devoted to Non-Resistance on the ground
of her belief that continued advocacy of Non-Resistance by
the *Liberator* would damage the paper and cause vexation
and discord among Abolitionists. After careful consideration
of the matter the executive committee of the Non-Resistance
Society accepted this point of view and determined upon the
publication of a semi-monthly organ called *The
Non-Resistant*. When it came to be published, however, it
was found that it could not be gotten out oftener than
monthly and its publication was continued from January,
1839, until the 29th of June, 1842, when it came to an end,
like many another hopeful publication, because of lack of
means---which is clear enough proof that the Non-Resistant
movement was not identical with the Abolition movement
itself, for the *Liberator* went its triumphal way until
Abolition was achieved.

*The Non-Resistant* itself was a small folio nineteen inches
by twelve, its four columns to the page being of the same
width as those of the *Liberator* to permit the use of the
same type in both publications. Its motto was, "Resist not
evil---Jesus Christ." The burden of the editorial work was
carried by Mrs. Maria Weston Chapman and Edmund Quincy,
together with Mr. Garrison, who stated, however, at the end
of *The Non-Resistant*'s existence, that he had not spent
half a day during the whole period of the paper's life in
preparing editorial matter for it. The bulk of the work was,
therefore, done by Mrs. Chapman and Mr. Quincy, assisted by
Charles K. Whipple, the Treasurer of the Non-Resistant
Society, and by Henry C. Wright, one of Mr. Garrison's
closest friends and associates. He was the sole missionary
in the field and was authorized in 1 41 to go abroad as a
"sort of missionary for the cause of peace, abolition,
temperance, chastity, and a pure and equal
Christianity"---surely a large order.

The success of the paper at the outset was very encouraging
and was greater than its organizers had dared to hope. It
paid for itself in 1840. At the outset Gerrit Smith, the
rich Abolitionist of Peterboro, N. Y., sent \\\$100 towards
its support, and this was considered very daring because of
the intense feeling among many of the Abolitionists that it
was traitorous to the great cause to espouse any other.
Arthur Tappan, the New York Abolitionist, who freed
Mr. Garrison from jail at the time of his incarceration in
Baltimore by paying his fine, on June 5, 1830, was so
incensed by *The Non-Resistant* that he returned the copy
sent to him and declared that he would have nothing to do
with an organ that proclaimed itself against the use of
force by the government and disseminated other
non-governmental sentiments.

Curiously enough, it was the sending of Mr. Wright on his
all-embracing mission to Europe which contributed more to
the death of *The Non-Resistant* than anything else. He was
that rare person among the Abolitionists, a good business
man and organizer, and his absence in England seriously
interfered with the development of the paper. But the chief
cause was, as Mr. Garrison wrote to Mr. Wright, "our time,
our means, our labors are so absorbed in seeking the
emancipation of our enslaved countrymen that we cannot do as
much specifically and directly for non-resistance as would
otherwise be in our power to perform." The Non-Resistant
Society kept alive until 1849, then it, too, gave up the
ghost, and presumably for the same reason. With every year
the anti-slavery struggle was growing bitterer and more
thrilling, and was absorbing more and more the energy and
the strength of all connected with it.

# What I Owe to Garrison, by Leo Tolstoy

(A Letter to V. Tchertkoff)

I thank you very much for sending me your biography of
Garrison.

Reading it, I lived again through the spring of my awakening
to true life. While reading Garrison's speeches and articles
I vividly recalled to mind the spiritual joy which I
experienced twenty years ago, when I found out that the law
of non-resistance---to which I had been inevitably brought
by the recognition of the Christian teaching in its full
meaning, and which revealed to me the great joyous ideal to
be realized in Christian life---was even as far back as the
forties not only recognized and proclaimed by Garrison
(about Ballou I learned later), but also placed by him at
the foundation of his practical activity in the emancipation
of the slaves.

My joy was at that time mingled with bewilderment as to how
it was that this great Gospel truth, fifty years ago
explained by Garrison, could have been so hushed up that I
had now to express it as something new.

My bewilderment was especially increased by the circumstance
that not only people antagonistic to the progress of
mankind, but also the most advanced and progressive men,
were either completely indifferent to this law or actually
opposed to the promulgation of that which lies at the
foundation of all true progress.

But as time went on it became clearer and clearer to me that
the general indifference and opposition which were then
expressed, and still continue to be
expressed---pre-eminently amongst political
workers---towards this law of non-resistance are merely
symptoms of the great significance of this law.

"The motto upon our banner," wrote Garrison in the midst of
his activity, "has been from the commencement of our moral
warfare 'OUR COUNTRY IS THE WORLD; OUR COUNTRYMEN ARE ALL
MANKIND.' We trust that it will be our only epitaph. Another
motto we have chosen is, 'UNIVERSAL EMANCIPATION.' Up to
this time we have limited its application to those who in
this country are held by Southern taskmasters as marketable
commodities, goods and chattels, and implements of
husbandry. Henceforth we shall use it in its widest
latitude---the emancipation of our whole race from the
dominion of man, from the thralldom of self, from the
government of brute force, from the bondage of sin, and the
bringing it under the dominion of God, the control of an
inward spirit, the government of the law of love..."

Garrison, as a man enlightened by the Christian teaching,
having begun with the practical aim of strife against
slavery, very soon understood that the cause of slavery was
not the casual temporary seizure by the Southerners of a few
millions of negroes, but the ancient and universal
recognition, contrary to the Christian teaching, of the
right of coercion on the part of certain people in regard to
certain others. A pretext for recognizing this right has
always been that men regarded it as possible to eradicate or
diminish evil by brute force, i.e., also by evil. Having
once realized this fallacy, Garrison put forward against
slavery neither the suffering of slaves, nor the cruelty of
slaveholders, nor the social equality of men, but the
eternal Christian law of refraining from opposing evil by
violence, i.e., of "non-resistance." Garrison understood
that which the most advanced among the fighters against
slavery did not understand: that the only irrefutable
argument against slavery is the denial of the right of any
man over the liberty of another under any conditions
whatsoever.

The Abolitionists endeavored to prove that slavery was
unlawful, disadvantageous, cruel; that it depraved men, and
so on; but the defenders of slavery in their turn proved the
untimeliness and danger of emancipation, and the evil
results liable to follow it. Neither the one nor the other
could convince his opponent. Whereas Garrison, understanding
that the slavery of the negroes was only a particular
instance of universal coercion, put forward a general
principle with which it was impossible not to agree--- the
principle that under no pretext has any man the right to
dominate, i.e., to use coercion over his fellows. Garrison
did not so much insist on the right of negroes to be free as
he denied the right of any man whatsoever, or of any body of
men, forcibly to coerce another man in any way. For the
purpose of combating slavery he advanced the principle of
struggle against all the evil of the world.

This principle advanced by Garrison was irrefutable, but it
affected and even overthrew all the foundations of
established social order, and therefore those who valued
their position in that existing order were frightened at its
announcement, and still more at its application to life;
they endeavored to ignore it, to elude it; they hoped to
attain their object without the declaration of the principle
of non-resistance to evil by violence, and that application
of it to life which would destroy, as they thought, all
orderly organization of human life. The result of this
evasion of the recognition of the unlawfulness of coercion
was that fratricidal war which, having externally solved the
slavery question, introduced into the life of the American
people the new---perhaps still greater---evil of that
corruption which accompanies every war.

Meanwhile the substance of the question remained unsolved,
and the same problem, only in a new form, now stands before
the people of the United States. Formerly the question was
how to free the negroes from the violence of the
slaveholders; now the question is how to free the negroes
from the violence of all the whites, and the whites from the
violence of all the blacks.

The solution of this problem in a new form is to be
accomplished certainly not by the lynching of the negroes,
nor by any skilful and liberal measures of American
politicians, but only by the application to life of that
same principle which was proclaimed by Garrison half a
century ago.

The other day in one of the most progressive periodicals I
read the opinion of an educated and intelligent writer,
expressed with complete assurance in its correctness, that
the recognition by me of the principle of non-resistance to
evil by violence is a lamentable and somewhat comic delusion
which, taking into consideration my old age and certain
merits, can only be passed over in indulgent silence.

Exactly the same attitude towards this question did I
encounter in my conversation with the remarkably intelligent
and progressive American Bryan. He also, with the evident
intention of gently and courteously showing me my delusion,
asked me how I explained my strange principle of
non-resistance to evil by violence, and as usual he brought
forward the argument, which seems to everyone irrefutable,
of the brigand who kills or violates a child. I told him
that I recognize non-resistance to evil by violence because,
having lived seventy-five years, I have never, except in
discussions, encountered that fantastic brigand, who, before
my eyes, desired to kill or violate a child, but that
perpetually I did and do see not one but millions of
brigands using violence towards children and women and men
and old people and all the laborers in the name of the
recognized right of violence over one's fellows. When I said
this my kind interlocutor, with his naturally quick
perception, not giving me time to finish, laughed, and
recognized that my argument was satisfactory.

No one has seen the fantastic brigand, but the world,
groaning under violence, lies before everyone's eyes. Yet no
one sees, nor desires to see, that the strife which can
liberate man from violence is not a strife with the
fantastic brigand, but with those actual brigands who
practise violence over men.

Non-resistance to evil by violence really means only that
the mutual interaction of rational beings upon each other
should consist not in violence (which can be only admitted
in relation to lower organisms deprived of reason) but in
rational persuasion; and that, consequently, towards this
substitution of rational persuasion for coercion all those
should strive who desire to further the welfare of mankind.

It would seem quite clear that in the course of the last
century, fourteen million people were killed, and that now
the labor and lives of millions of men are spent on wars
necessary to no one, and that all the land is in the hands
of those who do not work on it, and that all the produce of
human labor is swallowed up by those who do not work, and
that all the deceits which reign in the world exist only
because violence is allowed for the purpose of suppressing
that which appears evil to some people, and that therefore
one should endeavor to replace violence by persuasion. That
this may become possible it is necessary first of all to
renounce the right of coercion.

Strange to say, the most progressive people of our circle
regard it as dangerous to repudiate the right of violence
and to endeavor to replace it by persuasion. These people,
having decided that it is impossible to persuade a brigand
not to kill a child, think it also impossible to persuade
the working men not to take the land and the produce of
their labor from those who do not work, and therefore these
people find it necessary to coerce the laborers.

So that, however sad it is to say so, the only explanation
of the non-understanding of the significance of the
principle of non-resistance to evil by violence consists in
this, that the conditions of human life are so distorted
that those who examine the principle of nonresistance
imagine that its adaptation to life and the substitution of
persuasion for coercion would destroy all possibility of
that social organization and of those conveniences of life
which they enjoy.

But the change need not be feared; the principle of
non-resistance is not a principle of coercion but of concord
and love, and therefore it cannot be made coercively binding
upon men. The principle of non-resistance to evil by
violence, which consists in the substitution of persuasion
for brute force, can be only accepted voluntarily, and in
whatever measure it is freely accepted by men and applied to
life---i.e., according to the measure in which people
renounce violence and establish their relations upon
rational persuasion---only in that measure is true progress
in the life of men accomplished.

Therefore, whether men desire it or not, it is only in the
name of this principle that they can free themselves from
the enslavement and oppression of each other. Whether men
desire it or not, this principle lies at the basis of all
true improvement in the life of men which has taken place
and is still to take place.

Garrison was the first to proclaim this principle as a rule
for the organization of the life of men. In this is his
great merit. If at the time he did not attain the pacific
liberation of the slaves in America, he indicated the way of
liberating men in general from the power of brute force.

Therefore Garrison will forever remain one of the greatest
reformers and promoters of true human progress.

I think that the publication of this short biography will be
useful to many.

**Leo Tolstoy.**

Yasnaya Polyana, January, 1904.

# William Lloyd Garrison as Seen by a Grandson, by Oswald Garrison Villard

## I

When I was asked to set down on paper an estimate of William
Lloyd Garrison, I at first declined. A grandson to write
modestly and usefully about a beloved grandsire? It appeared
an impossible undertaking, but others far more competent
being not available and I being again urged, it seemed but
right that I should at least make the effort and leave it to
the readers to decide how largely I had failed to preserve
the unbiased historical attitude.

It is perhaps in my favor that I am too far removed from the
great Abolition conflict to have even a memory of that
heroic era. Yet something of the spirit of it must have
surrounded my cradle, since nothing in all my life has
seemed as vital as the fundamental doctrines of the
Abolitionists or as thrilling as the greatest of moral wars
in America. As a small child I was never wholly unconscious
of the gracious personality, of the kindly, benevolent, and
serene spirit which dominated that home in Roxbury, to which
every member of the family came in completed love and
devotion in order to round out a circle of extraordinary
gaiety and happiness unmarred by discord of any kind.

But even to the child there was something in those mild eyes
behind the gold spectacles and those wonderfully firm lines
around the generous mouth of the patriarch of the home that
gave the little boy concern if he strayed from the straight
and narrow path. One of his childish recollections is of the
nonresistant grandfather leading a terrified, and therefore
decidedly non-resistant, imp of a grandson into durance vile
in a cupboard-prison, not for defending anybody's human
rights, but for having wickedly and malevolently assailed
other urchins with what the Abolitionists would, in their
Biblical language, have called "carnal weapons." In the
transformation which then came over the kindly eyes and in
the set of the firm mouth of the Liberator, now turned
jailer, the little boy found much that in later years, as he
has looked back upon that incident, has made it easy for him
to picture his grandfather in the heat of most
uncompromising attacks upon the powers of evil, to see him,
in his mind's eye, facing the Rynders' mob, in New York
City, or writing that ringing declaration that he would not
retreat a single inch and that he would be heard.

If the little boy quailed and retreated when militant
destiny in grand-parental form overtook him in the midst of
wrongdoing, he never had any desire to question the justice
of the penalty awarded. And here again a chance bit of
discipline has made the then little offender feel
instinctively throughout his existence that the great
moving, abiding desire of that unusual life which touched
his own so briefly, yet influenced it so profoundly, was the
desire for justice, for "exact justice," to use that homely,
vigorous and redundant phrase that so often appears in the
grandfather s writings. No love for the offender, however
dear, no hatred of wrongdoing, but was governed in him by
that one great principle of doing justice that justice might
come out of it all.

It was not only a happy, but a rarely serene home over which
the boy's grandfather presided from the time that he had a
home of his own. The world at large might think of it as one
forever stirred by intense emotions, now swayed by vibrant
gusts of passion, now thrilled by the prospect of personal
violence, now roused to extremes by hot fits of outraged
indignation. But within its walls were singular peace and
content. Where the spirit of the leader was so cheerful and
so unfailingly serene there could be no question as to the
correctness of the chart of life or of the methods of
pursuing that great and all controlling objective of human
freedom. Could such dauntless poise, such durable
satisfaction in living---to borrow a phrase of ex-President
Eliot's---such equanimity of spirit, such an atmosphere of
joy and of absolute faith be possible if the fundamental
philosophy were wrong? No one could enter his house and
doubt the uplifting nature of the struggle in which Garrison
was engaged, or its righteousness. There is no more concrete
example among all the many Abolition homes of similar worth
and similarly unselfish devotion, of the spiritual rewards
which come to those who labor in the vineyards of humanity.

## II

Do we not often overlook what the cause did for the reformer
while asking what the reformer did for the cause? Well, here
is a case where a cause took hold of a youth, untutored and
unknown, but gifted with absolute truth and the power of
terrible expression. It gave him the opportunity to expand
and enrich his own spirit, and every day of his living. To
each wrong Garrison's soul vibrated as the strings of
aeolian harps to the winds of the forest; but the tones that
his human instrument gave forth varied according to where
you stood when you heard. To some who listened there came
only the most rasping dissonances and discords, portending
nothing but treason to the existing order of society; to
other auditors the sounds were of divine sweetness. Whatever
the message of the tones or their timbre, there can be no
question as to their power to stir. You might hate or you
might love, but listen unaffected you could not, and always
the evolution of the man himself made him the truer
philosopher at home and the more stinging a censor outside.

And that evolution became so noteworthy because his own self
was so completely subordinated. He had no ambitions save to
serve; he found in serving his causes the most complete
happiness. The opportunity for leadership was his
unrestricted because there was nothing to hold him back.
When Wendell Phillips was paying for his audacity by social
ostracism, by the loss of his Harvard friends, by forfeiting
chances of political preferment, Garrison had practically no
sacrifices to make. He had no social position to lose. He
was in debt to nobody. No one had any hold upon him with
which to padlock his utterance. And so it was only a
question of how far his abilities would carry him in the
leadership of the movement. The strain of caring for his
family he bore more easily than most men. He had sublime
faith that the Lord would provide even if he gave away his
one reserve suit to someone who needed it more than he, or
if he should perish at the hands of a broadcloth mob. The
wolf might be at the door, but the guest was there, too, and
the latch-string ever hung out, no matter how bare the
cupboard or how anxious the housewife. Then he insisted on
leading an absolutely blameless private life, to the great
vexation of his enemies, whom his use of Biblical language
and apt quotation of the Scriptures embarrassed and amazed
beyond words. In short, he was the despair of all opponents.

What could you do with a man like this? You threw him in
jail and he liked it immensely and utilized the opportunity
to strike off his best bit of verse. You put a price upon
his head and he gloried in it. You threatened him with death
and dragged him through the streets with a rope around his
waist and he showed his courage by failing even to be
excited, and then went home to utilize your outbreak against
him in a most effective sermon against the thing you were
trying to uphold. You ridiculed him as a nobody and he
calmly admitted it and went on preaching his gospel of
liberty. You tried to close the mails to him, to undermine
his influence, to destroy his reputation, his judgment and
his sanity, and he went on pounding you, convicting you out
of your own mouth and printing in his column in *The
Liberator* headed "The Refuge of Oppression" tell-tale
happenings which portrayed at its worst the institution you
were seeking to defend. And then when in despair you sought
the aid of the law and of the officials of his State to
prosecute him you found that he so walked by day and by
night that you could not even indict him for running an
underground railroad station, which he was careful not to
because of his conspicuousness.

You called him an effeminate fanatic because he would stand
up for the cause of woman in a day when there were fewer
suffragists than Abolitionists, and he went calmly on
insisting that his platform was not occupied unless women
stood upon it. You called him crack-brained because he
crossed 'the ocean to plead for the slave and then declined
to speak for what was dearest to his soul because the women
delegates with him were not admitted to the Convention. You
denounced him as the friend and ally of Susan B. Anthony and
Lucy Stone, yes, of Mary Walker, and Garrison's hopelessly
addled brain took it all as a compliment and gloried in
'these spiritual alliances which some would have dubbed his
shame. How could you keep your patience with a man like
this,---one who would not only let loose the savage Negro on
the community, but believed that every walk of life, every
sphere of intellectual activity should be open to the
despised sex and actually preached that women, not men,
should decide what place women should occupy in modern
society.

And always he insisted upon being happy, no matter what you
said or did to him. His heart was as the heart of a child
even when he denounced a whole class in language of complete
immoderation. It did not affect that heart when you assured
him for the five thousandth time that he had thrown away his
influence by his unbridled pen, ruined his cause by his
vituperation and his denunciation of good men and women who
did their duty by their slaves like Christians, or by taking
up the despicable case of those masculine females who wished
the ballot. You certainly cannot wage polemical warfare with
an antagonist like this. He will not play fair; he does not
follow the rules of the game. He enters the combat in such a
shining armor of happiness and personal righteousness and
complete unselfishness as to make it impossible for the
point of your sword to enter at any point. And all the time
he is belaboring you with his heavy broadsword with the
utmost of calmness and most annoying vigor.

## III

From Garrison came ever a torrent of denunciation of
wrong-doing too Niagara-like, if you please, and marked,
perhaps, as his latest biographer, Mr. John Jay Chapman
avers, with a restricted and uncertain intellectual grasp.
But it was what the hour called for; with all its
ponderousness, with all its Biblical allusions and
quotations, it was clear, wonderfully telling and still more
wonderfully suited to the sturdy middle-class audience and
the time to which it appealed. Mr. Chapman realizes this,
for side by side with his criticism he writes:

>  "Garrison was not a man of this kind. His mission was
> more lowly, more popular, more visible; and his
> intellectual grasp was restricted and uncertain. Garrison
> was a man of the market place. Language to him was not the
> mere means of stating truth, but a mace to break a jail.
> He was to be the instrument of great and rapid changes in
> public opinion during an epoch of terrible and fluctuating
> excitement. The thing which he is to see, to say, and to
> proclaim, from moment to moment, is as freshly given to
> him by prodigal nature, is as truly spontaneous, as the
> song of the thrush. He never calculates, he acts upon
> inspiration; he is always ingenuous, innocent,
> self-poised, and, as it were, inside of some self-acting
> machinery which controls his course, and rolls out the
> carpet of his life for him to walk on.

And he adds:

>  "All this part of Garrison's mental activity is his true
> vocation. Here he rages like a lion of Judah. By these
> onslaughts he is freeing people from their mental bonds;
> he is shaking down the palaces of Babylon."

Out of the Bible he drew not only his spiritual weapons, but
from it came much of his calm philosophy, his complete
adoption of the example of Jesus as the model for himself,
his belief in the necessity of non-resistance. To quote
Mr. Chapman again:

>  "To Garrison, the Bible was the many-piped organ to which
> he sang the song of his life, and the arsenal from which
> he drew the weapons of his warfare. I doubt if any man
> ever knew the Bible so well, or could produce a text to
> fit a political emergency with such startling felicity as
> Garrison... I doubt whether Cromwell or Milton could have
> rivaled Garrison in this field of quotation; and the power
> of quotation is as dreadful a weapon as any which the
> human intellect can forge. From his boyhood upward
> Garrison's mind was soaked in the Bible and in no other
> book."

Yet while poring thus over the greatest of books has made a
gloomy or somber nature out of many a man, the spontaneity,
the gaiety, the serenity of Garrison's nature was never
affected by it. John Brown by contrast was a typical
Roundhead, gravely earnest and intense and usually dull, as
well as ponderous, both in his writings and in the dourness
of his life, while Garrison's was full of cheer and sunshine
and optimism, distinguished by its benevolence as well as by
its unwavering faith in the eventual victory. This is the
point I would most dwell upon---the essential richness of
Garrison's life and its complete happiness, good-humor,
sweetness and kindliness. There is a story of a Southerner
who, meeting Garrison on a boat, fell into conversation with
him and wound up by saying:

>  "I have been much interested, sir, in what you have said,
> and the exceedingly frank and temperate manner in which
> you have treated the subject. If all Abolitionists were
> like you, there would be much less opposition to your
> enterprise. But, sir, depend upon it, that hare-brained,
> reckless, violent fanatic Garrison will damage, if he does
> not shipwreck, any cause."

Men and women were invariably amazed as they met him at the
gentleness of his spirit and marvelled that such harsh and
bitter language, such prophet-like denunciation could issue
from one whose countenance was so benign. They soon saw that
there was no personal animus, no sense of personal wrong
save that which Jesus Himself might have felt at the
wronging of one of His fellow human beings. It was the sense
of impersonal justice which was the mainspring of it all.
Hard as it is for even a sympathizer to read it today into
Garrison's utterances, a real desire to help the
slave-holder was ever active within him. If it be said that
he often concealed his affection for that particular
fellow-man beneath torrential excoriation, the answer is
that the grandson who writes these lines is not wrong in
feeling that the abiding desire of his unusual life was
absolute justice. The very fact that the grandfather loved
or cared for any one or anybody made all the more vigorous
the pointing out of wrong-doing; his discipline became the
more stern, his blows more like those of a sledgehammer, if
he but felt that he could thus serve best the erring he
really cared for.

## IV

The enigma of personality---what can surpass it in its
profound mystery? The fundamental whys we ask about it
remain unanswered though the analysis of the spirit's
feelings and of the brain's methods go on apace. Why should
the love of mankind and the readiness to give one's life to
the lowly and despised have so controlled the existence of
three such different spirits as Wendell Phillips, John Brown
and William Lloyd Garrison? Why did this inspiration come to
their souls and not to any other three of the multitude of
their generation? John Brown, at the age of fifty-five
years, when most men's thoughts begin to turn from the
activities of life to the past and the future, suddenly
changed from a simple guardian of flocks and tiller of the
soil, a farmer, surveyor, cattle expert and wool merchant,
to an arch plotter of many disguises, a belligerent pioneer,
an assailant of sovereign government, bent on overthrowing
human bondage by raising the banner of physical revolt.

The contagion of reform affected Garrison and Phillips, on
the other hand, in early youth---but the very dissimilarity
of their early lives, their social surroundings, and their
prospects makes all the more amazing the fact that both
should on this fundamental issue of human brotherhood have
seen eye to eye. Sometimes I think this all a question of
birth; that there is no such thing as changing other
people's opinions, once formed, or eradicating the seeds of
hatred and oppression if once they begin to open and sprout
within one; that all moral reform means marshalling those
who are unfettered and unprejudiced, stirring them morally
and then proving that they are in the majority, either
because of numbers or because of the ethical soundness of
their cause. Certainly Garrison, the son of an errant sea
captain, and Wendell Phillips, the scion of aristocracy,
would seem to bear out part of this theory at least. But why
must they needs become latter-day disciples to revivify
faith in the brotherhood of man, the fundamental doctrines
of Christ?

For one thing, the three similar yet strongly dissimilar men
illustrate the essential democracy of any such great reform
as the liberation of the slaves. Irresistibly such a
movement draws from all classes of society those made free
by communion with the eternal truths; those who are willing
to apply fundamental principles to any given situation and
measure each by the yard-stick of an ideal, no matter how
impractical the test may seem. The difference between the
reformer and the non-reforming citizen is defined by the
readiness of the one to take his stand on a principle and to
face obloquy, ridicule and hate while striving to apply that
principle to all conditions, under all circumstances. Most
important of all, there enters into the soul of the reformer
the divine desire to serve, no matter what the price, if
only thereby the world can be made to advance by as much as
the fraction of an inch.

\[*This essay reprinted by kind permission from* The World
Tomorrow.\]

# Bibliography

## Works About William Lloyd Garrison

An American Hero; the Story of William Lloyd Garrison.
Written for Young People by Frances E. Cooke. London: Swan
Sonnenschein & Co. 1888.

A Brief Sketch of the Trial of William Lloyd Garrison for an
Alleged Libel on Francis Todd, of Massachusetts.
\[Baltimore, 1830?\]

A Discourse on William Lloyd Garrison and the Anti-Slavery
Movement. Delivered at the Church of the Saviour, Brooklyn,
N. Y., by A. P. Putnam, June 1, 1879. Brooklyn, N. Y.,
Tremlett & Co., 1879.

The Garrison Mob in Boston, October 21, 1835. By Ellis Ames.
(Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society.
February, 1881, p. 340-344.)

Garrison, the Non-Resistant. By Ernest Howard Crosby.
Chicago, The Public Publishing Co., 1905.

The Martyr Age of the United States. By Harriet Martineau.
(London and Westminster Review, December, 1838. Reprinted in
pamphlet form. New York: S. W. Benedict, 1839.)

A Memorial of William Lloyd Garrison from the City of
Boston. Boston: Printed by order of the City Council, 1886.

The Moral Crusader, William Lloyd Garrison; a Biographical
Essay founded on The Story of Garrison's Life told by his
children. By Goldwin Smith. Toronto: Williamson & Co. 1892.
Also New York: Funk & Wagnalls. *The difference between
these editions is in the typography and the frontispiece
portrait.*

A National Testimonial to William Lloyd Garrison. Boston:
1866. *An invitation to contribute towards a national
testimonial of not less than fifty thousand dollars to
William Lloyd Garrison. Signed by many subscribers and the
Executive Committee, J. A. Andrew, chairman.*

Papers Relating to the Garrison Mob. Edited by Th. Lyman,
3rd. Cambridge: Welch, Bigelow & Co. 1870.

Rebels and Reformers, Biographies for Young People. By
Arthur and Dorothea P. Ponsonby. London: G. Allen & Unwin
Ltd. \[1917.\]

A Short Biography of William Lloyd Garrison. By V.
Tchertkoff and F. Holah; with an Introductory Appreciation
of his Life and Work by Leo Tolstoy. London: The Free Age
Press. 1904.

A Sketch of the Character and Defence of the Principles of
William Lloyd Garrison; being an Address delivered before
the Managers of the "Maine Anti-Slavery Society," in
Portland, Me., on the evening of the 1st of November, 1833,
by One of the Board. Published by request. New York: Printed
by Henry R. Piercy, 7 Theatre Alley. 1833.

Pamphlet, with imprint: Memoir of William Lloyd Garrison.
*The author was James Frederic Otis, one of the founders of
the American Anti-Slavery Society and signers of the
Declaration of Sentiments at Philadelphia in the month
following the Address. (He was afterwards a backslider from
the abolition faith, but survived emancipation, dying
February 2, 1867.)*

The Story of a Noble Life: William Lloyd Garrison. By
William E. A. Axon. London: S. W. Partridge & Co. 1890.
(Onward Series.)

Tributes to William Lloyd Garrison at the Funeral Services,
May 28, 1879. Boston: Houghton, Osgood & Co. 1879.

The frontispiece a profile view (heliotype) of the portrait
bust by Anne Whitney.

Visit of William Lloyd Garrison to Manchester. Manchester,
England, United Kingdom Alliance. \[1867?\]

William Lloyd Garrison. By John Jay Chapman. New York:
Moffat, Yard & Co. 1913. Second edition, revised and
enlarged. Boston: The Atlantic Monthly Press. 1921.

William Lloyd Garrison. By Lindsay Swift. Philadelphia: G.
W. Jacobs & Company. 1911. (American Crisis Biographies.)

William Lloyd Garrison. By N. Moore. Boston: Ginn &
Co. 1888.

William Lloyd Garrison. Von Georg Gizycki. Berlin: A. Asher
& Co. 1890. *(Authorized German translation and condensation
of the Story of His Life told by His Children.)*

William Lloyd Garrison. By Mary Howitt. *In the "People's
Journal" for September 12, 19, 26, and October 3, 1846; with
a portrait on wood drawn by H. Anelay, and probably engraved
by W. J. Linton. The Memoir was reprinted in the
"Pennsylvania Freeman" for March 25, 1847.*

William Lloyd Garrison; a Commemoration Discourse preached
at the First Unitarian Church, Philadelphia. By Joseph May.
Boston: G. H. Ellis. 1879.

William Lloyd Garrison and his Times. By Oliver Johnson;
with an Introduction by John G. Whittier. Boston: B. B.
Russell & Co. 1880. (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin & Co. 1881.)

William Lloyd Garrison, the Abolitionist; by Archibald H.
Grimke. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. 1891.

William Lloyd Garrison; the Story of his Life told by his
Children. New York: The Century Co. Volumes I, II, 1885,
volumes III, IV, 1889. (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin &
Co. 1894.) *The documentary Life by way of eminency. It
contains six portraits of Garrison, and many more of his
principal coadjutors on both sides of the Atlantic; maps,
facsimiles of handwriting, etc. It is the quarry from which
all subsequent lives have necessarily been constructed.*

## Writings and Speeches of William Lloyd Garrison

The Abolitionists and their Relations to the War; a Lecture
at the Cooper Institute, New York, January 14, 1862. New
York: E. D. Barker. 1862.

An Address delivered at the Broadway Tabernacle, New York,
August 1, 1838, by request of the People of Color of that
city, in commemoration of the complete emancipation of
600,000 slaves on that day in the British West Indies.
Boston: Isaac Knapp. 1838.

An Address delivered before the Old Colony Anti-Slavery
Society at South Scituate, Mass., July 4, 1839. Boston: Dow
& Jackson. 1839.

An Address delivered before the Free People of Color, in
Philadelphia, New York, and other places during the month of
June, 1831. Boston: Stephen Foster. 1831.

Address delivered in Boston, New York and Philadelphia
before the Free People of Color in April, 1833. New York:
Printed for the Free People of Color. 1833.

An Address delivered in Marlboro Chapel, Boston, July 4,
1838. Boston: Isaac Knapp. 1838.

An Address on the Progress of the Abolition Cause, delivered
before the African Abolition Freehold Society of Boston,
July 16, 1832. Boston: Garrison & Knapp. 1832.

Address on the Subject of American Slavery delivered in the
National Hall, Holborn, September 2, 1846. London: Richard
Kinder. 1846.

Anti-Slavery Melodies for the Friends of Freedom., Prepared
for the Hingham Anti-Slavery Society. Hingham, Mass.: Elijah
B. Gill. 1843. *Set to music. The hymns 3, 18, 27, and
lyrics on pages 64, 70, are Garrison's---the first hymn
curiously razeed to fit the metre.*

Helen Eliza Garrison; a Memorial. Cambridge \[Mass.\]:
Riverside Press. 1876.

The "Infidelity" of Abolitionism. New York. 1860.

Joseph Mazzini, His Life, Writings, and Political
Principles; with an Introduction by William Lloyd Garrison.
New York: Hurd & Houghton. 1872.

Lectures of George Thompson. Compiled from various English
editions; also a Brief History of His Connection with the
Anti-Slavery Cause in England, by William Lloyd Garrison.
Boston: Isaac Knapp. 1836.

A Letter on the Political Obligations of Abolitionists. By
James G. Birney; with a Reply by William Lloyd Garrison.
Boston: Dow & Jackson. 1839.

Letter to Louis Kossuth concerning Freedom and Slavery in
the United States. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1852.

Letters relative to the So-Called Southern Policy of
President Hayes. By William E. Chandler, together with a
Letter to Mr. Chandler of Mr. William Lloyd Garrison.
Concord, N. H., Monitor & Statesman Office. 1878.

The Loyalty and Devotion of the Colored Americans in the
Revolution and War of 1812. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1861.
Reprinted in 1918 by Young's Book Exchange, New York.

"The New Reign of Terror" in the Slaveholding States, for
1859-60. Compiled by W. L. Garrison. New York: American
Anti-Slavery Society. 1860. (Anti-Slavery Tracts, No. 4. New
series.)

No Compromise with Slavery, an Address delivered in New
York, February 14, 1854. New York: American Anti-Slavery
Society, 1854.

No Fetters in the Bay State; Speech before the Committee on
Federal Relations \[of the Massachusetts Legislature\],
Thursday, February 24, 1859. Boston. 1859.

Principles and Mode of Action of the American Anti-Slavery
Society; a Speech. London: William Tweedie. \[1853.\] (Leeds
Anti-Slavery Series, No. 86.)

Proceedings at the Public Breakfast held in honor of William
Lloyd Garrison, Esq., of Boston, Massachusetts, in
St. James's Hall, London, on Saturday, June 29th, 1867.
London: William Tweedie. 1868.

Proceedings of a crowded Meeting of the Colored Population
of Boston, assembled the 15th July, 1846, for the purpose of
bidding farewell to William Lloyd Garrison, on His Departure
for England; with His Speech on the Occasion. Dublin: Webb &
Chapman. 1846.

A Selection of Anti-Slavery Hymns, for the use of the
Friends of Emancipation. Boston: Garrison & Knapp. 1834.
Preface signed by William Lloyd Garrison.

Selections from the Writings and Speeches of William Lloyd
Garrison. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1852.

Slavery in the United States of America, an

7 8 WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON

Appeal to the Friends of Negro Emancipation throughout Great
Britain. London. 1833. Signed W. L. Garrison.

Sonnets and Other Poems. Boston: Oliver Johnson. 1843.

Southern Hatred of the American Government, the People of
the North, and Free Institutions. Compiled by W. L.
Garrison. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1862.

Speeches of William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick Douglass at
the great Anti-Slavery Meeting held at Paisley, Scotland,
23d September, 1846. \[Glasgow?\] Alex. Gardner. 1846.

Spirit of the South towards Northern Freemen and Soldiers
defending the American Flag against Traitors of the Deepest
Dye. Boston: R. F. Wallcut. 1861.

Thoughts on African Colonization; or, An Impartial
Exhibition of the Doctrines, Principles, and Purposes of the
American Colonization Society; together with the
Resolutions, Addresses, and Remonstrances of the Free People
of Color. "Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee."
"Prove all things, hold fast that which is good." Boston:
Garrison & Knapp. 1832.

Three Unlike Speeches. By W. L. Garrison, G. Davis, A. H.
Stephens. The Abolitionists and their relation to the War.
New York: E. D. Barker. 1862. (Pulpit and Rostrum, numbers
26-27.)

West India Emancipation; a Speech delivered at Abington,
Mass., on the first day of August, 1854. Boston. 1854.

William Lloyd Garrison on State Regulation of Vice. \[New
York? 1879?\]

Words of Garrison; a centennial selection. Boston: Houghton,
Mifflin and Company. 1905. *Compiled by his sons Wendell
Phillips and Francis Jackson Garrison.*
