# Preface

The primary object of this history is to relate the social problem to
the experience of the past and so to help bring about a clearer
comprehension of its nature. "The reason," says the author of *Erewhon*,
"why we cannot see the future as plainly as the past is because we know
too little of the actual past and the actual present. The future depends
upon the present, and the present depends upon the past, and the past is
unalterable." It is by studying the past in the light of the experience
of the present and the present in the light of the past that we may
attain to a fuller understanding both of the present and the past.
Certain aspects of industrialism are new to the world, and the past
offers us no ready-made solution for them, but to understand them it is
necessary to be familiar with Mediaeval principles, for such Mediaeval
problems as those of law and currency, of the State and the Guilds, lie
behind industrialism and have determined its peculiar development. If we
were more familiar with history we should see the problems of
industrialism in a truer perspective and would have less disposition to
evolve social theories from our inner consciousness. This neglect of the
experience of the past is no new thing; it is as old as civilization
itself. Thus in criticizing some of the fantastic proposals of Plato for
the reorganization of Greek society, Aristotle says: "Let us remember
that we should not disregard the experience of the ages; in the
multitude of years, these things, if they were good, would certainly not
have been unknown; for almost everything has been found out, although
sometimes they are not put together; in other cases men do not use the
knowledge that they have." It would be a mistake to push this idea too
far, and refuse to entertain any proposal which could not claim the
authority of history, but it would be just as well before embarking on
any new enterprise to inquire if history has anything to say about it.
If we did we should find that debatable matter was confined within very
narrow limits, and with minds enriched through the study of history we
should not waste so much of our time in fruitless discussion. Above all,
we should speedily discover that there is no such thing as a cure-all
for social ills. We should become more interested in principles and have
less regard for schemes.

Though the Guild theory is ultimately based upon historical
considerations, the absence hitherto of a history written from the
Guildsman's point of view has been a serious handicap to the movement.
Not only has this lack pre vented it from giving historical
considerations the prominence they deserve, but when Guild ideas are
adopted by Socialists who have not been historical students they are apt
to be distorted by the materialist conception of history which lies in
the background of the minds of so many. Hence it becomes urgent, if the
movement is not to be side-tracked, that Guildsmen should have a history
of their own which gathers together information of importance to them.
In this volume are gathered together such facts from a hundred volumes,
and it is hoped by organizing them into a consistent theory to show not
only that history is capable of a very different interpretation from the
one that materialists affirm but that the Guild Movement has a definite
historical significance. Indeed, we are persuaded that the success which
has followed its propaganda is ultimately due to the fact that it has
such a significance.

That the materialist conception of history is a one-sided and distorted
conception, all students of history who are not materialists by
temperament are well aware. It is made plausible by isolating a single
factor in history and ignoring other factors. The theory of the Class
War is as grotesque and false an explanation of the history of society
as a history of marriage would be that was built up from the records of
Divorce Courts, which carefully took note of all the unhappy marriages
and denied the existence of happy ones because they were not supported
by documentary evidence. The heresies of Marx stand on precisely such a
footing. They are false, not because of what they say, but because of
what they leave unsaid. Such theories gain credence to-day because
capitalism has undermined all the great traditions of the past, and thus
emptied life of its contents. It is true that by the light of the
materialist conception considerable patches of history, including the
history of the present day, may be explained. It is true of the later
history of Greece and Rome as of Europe after the Reformation; for in
the decline of all civilizations the material factor comes to
predominate. But as an explanation of history as a whole and of the
Mediaeval period in particular it is most demonstrably false, and only
ignorance, if not the deliberate falsification in the past, of Mediaeval
history could have made such an explanation plausible. It is important
that this should be recognized, not merely because it is an injustice to
the past to have its reality distorted, but because of its reaction upon
the mind of to-day. It makes all the difference to our thinking about
the problems of the present day whether we believe modern society has
developed from a social system which was inhuman and based upon class
tyranny, in which ignorance and superstition prevailed, or from one
which enjoyed freedom and understood the nature of liberty in its widest
and most philosophic sense. If a man believes that society in the past
was based upon class tyranny he will see everything in an inverted
perspective, he will be predisposed to support all the forces of social
disintegration which masquerade under the name of "progress" because he
will view with suspicion all traditions which have survived from the
past and have a prejudice against all normal forms of social
organization. If it be true that the Middle Ages was a time of tyranny,
ignorance and superstition, then to a logically minded person it
naturally follows that the emancipation of the people is bound up with
the destruction of such traditions as have survived, for to such a mind
tradition and tyranny become synonymous terms. But if, on the contrary,
he knows that such was not the case, that the Middle Ages was an age of
real enlightenment, he will not be so readily deceived. He will know how
to estimate at their proper value the movements he sees around him, and
not be so disposed to place his faith in quack remedies, for he will
know that for the masses the transition from the Middle Ages has not
been one from bondage to freedom, from poverty to well-being, but from
security to insecurity, from status to wage-slavery, from well-being to
poverty. He will know, moreover, that the Servile State is not a new
menace, but that it has been extending its tentacles ever since the days
when Roman Law was revived.

Looked at from this point of view, the materialist conception of
history, with its prejudice against Medievalism, is a useful doctrine
for the purposes of destroying existing society, but must prevent the
arrival of a new one. I feel fairly safe in affirming this, because
Marx's forecasts of the future are in these days being falsified. Up to
a certain point Marx was right. He foresaw that the trend of things
would be for industry to get into fewer and fewer hands, but it cannot
be claimed that the deductions he made from this forecast are proving to
be correct, for he did not foresee this war. The circumstance that Marx
gave it as his opinion that the annexation of Alsace and Lorraine by
Germany would lead in fifty years time to a great European war does not
acquit him, since the war that he foresaw was a war of. revenge in which
France was to be the aggressor and had nothing whatsoever to do with
industrial development, which this one certainly had. Not having
foreseen this war, Marx did not foresee the anti-climax in which the
present system seems destined to end. And this is fatal to the whole
social theory, because it brings to the light of day a weakness which
runs through all his theory---his inability to understand the moral
factor and hence to make allowances for it in his theories. Marx saw the
material forces at work in society up to a certain point very clearly,
and from this point of view he is worthy of study. But he never
understood that this was only one half of the problem and finally the
less important half. For along with all material change there go
psychological changes; and these he entirely ignores. In the case in
question Marx failed to foresee that the growth of the pressure of
competition would be accompanied by an increase in national jealousies.
On the contrary, he tells us in the *Communist Manifesto* (written in
1847) that national antagonisms are steadily to diminish. But if he
misjudged national---I might almost say industrial---psychology on this
most fundamental point, it demonstrates that for practical purposes Marx
and his materialist conception of history are anything but an infallible
guide. And so we are led to inquire whether, if Marx, owing to his
neglect of psychology, proved to be wrong on this issue, he may not be
equally untrustworthy in other directions; whether, in fact, the
anti-climax which has overtaken national relationships may not likewise
take place in industry; whether the process of industrial centralization
which Marx foresaw is not being accompanied by internal disintegration,
and whether the issue of it all is to be his proletarian industrialized
State or a relapse into social anarchy. Such, indeed, does appear to me
to be the normal trend of economic development; for when everything but
economic considerations have been excluded from life---and the
development of industrialism tends to exclude everything else---men tend
naturally to quarrel, because there is nothing positive left to bind men
together in a communal life. Looking at history from this point of view,
it may be said that if Marx's view is correct, and if exploitation has
played the part in history which he affirms it has, then, frankly, I do
not see how civilization ever came into existence. We know that
exploitation is breaking civilisation up; we may be equally sure it did
not create it. Moreover/it leaves us with no hope for the future. For if
it be true that the history of civilization is merely the history of
class struggles, what reason is there to suppose that with the end of
the reign of capitalism class struggle will come to an end? May it not
merely change its form? The experience of the Bolshevik regime in Russia
would appear to suggest such a continuation.

It remains for me to thank Mr. J. Pla, Mr. M. B. Reckitt, Mr. G. R. S.
Taylor, Mr. L. Ward and Mr. C. White for the interesting material they
so generously placed at my disposal, and the Editor of the *New Age* for
permission to reprint such chapters and parts of chapters as appeared in
his journal.

A. J. P.

66, STRAND ON GREEN. W. 4.

*September* 1919.

# Greece and Rome

The first fact in history which has significance for Guildsmen is that
of the introduction of currency, which took place in the seventh century
before Christ when the Lydian kings introduced stamped metal bars of
fixed weight as a medium of exchange. In the course of a generation or
two this uniform measure entirely replaced the bars of unfixed weight
which the Greeks had made use of when exchange was not by barter. It was
a simple device from which no social change was expected, but the
development which followed upon it was simply stupendous.
Civilization---that is, the development of the material accessories of
life, may be said to date from that simple invention, for by
facilitating exchange it made foreign trade, differentiation of
occupation and specialization on the crafts and arts possible. But along
with the undoubted advantages which a fixed currency brought with it
there came an evil unknown to primitive society---the economic problem;
for the introduction of currency created an economic revolution,
comparable only to that which followed the invention of the steam engine
in more recent times, by completely undermining the communist base of
the Mediterranean societies. "We can watch it in Greece, in Palestine
and in Italy, and see the temper of the sufferers reflected in Hesiod
and Theognis, Amos and Hosea, and in the legends of early Rome."

The progress of economic individualism soon divided Greek society into
two distinct and hostile classes---the prosperous landowners, the
merchants and money-lending class on the one hand, and the peasantry and
the debt-slaves on the other. Hitherto no one had ever thought of
claiming private property in land. It had never been treated as a
commodity to be bought and sold. The man who tilled the soil thought of
it as belonging to the family, to his ancestors and descendants as much
as to himself. But within a generation or two after the introduction of
currency the peasantry everywhere began to find themselves in need of
money, and they found that it could be borrowed by pledging their
holdings as security for loans. It was thus that private property in
land first came into existence. Land tended to pass into the hands of
the Eupatrid by default. For lean years have a way of running in cycles,
and at such times the "haves" can take advantage of the necessities of
the "have-nots."

The reason for these developments is not far to seek. So long as
exchange was carried on by barter, a natural limit was placed to the
development of trade, because people would only exchange for their own
personal use. Exchange would only be possible when each party to the
bargain possessed articles which the other wanted. But with the
introduction of currency this limitation was removed, and for the first
time in history there came into existence a class of men who bought and
sold entirely for the purposes of gain. These middlemen or merchants
became specialists in finance. They knew better than the peasantry the
market value of things, and so found little difficulty in taking
advantage of them. Little by little they became wealthy and the
peasantry their debtors. It is the same story wherever currency is
unregulated---the distributor enslaves the producer. So it is not
surprising that the Greeks always maintained a certain prejudice against
all occupations connected with buying and selling, which they held were
of a degrading nature. For though it is manifest that society cannot get
along without traders, it is imperative for the well-being of society
that they do not exercise too much power. The Greeks found by experience
that such men were no better than they ought to be and that the
association of trading with money-making reflected itself in their
outlook on life, leading them eventually to suppose that everything
could be bought and that there was nothing too great to be expressed in
terms of money.

Though the Greeks thought much about the problem which had followed the
introduction of currency, to the end it eluded the efforts of their
lawgivers and statesmen to solve it, and mankind had to wait until the
coming of Mediaevalism before a solution was forthcoming. Then the
Guilds solved the problem by restricting currency to its legitimate use
as a medium of exchange by means of fixing prices. Plato, it is true,
anticipated the Mediaeval solution. In *Laws* (917) he actually forbids
bargaining and insists upon fixed prices. But nothing came of his
suggestion. Perhaps it was too late in the day to give practical
application to such a principle. For Plato wrote in the period following
the Peloponnesian War when profiteering was rampant, and a restoration
of the communal spirit to society, such as followed the rise of
Christianity, was necessary before such a measure could be applied.
Hence it was that Aristotle reverted to the principle of Solon that the
cultivation of good habits must accompany the promulgation of good laws.

All the early Greek lawgivers who attempted to solve the economic
problem which currency had introduced sought the solution not along
Guild lines, by seeking to restrict currency to its legitimate use as a
medium of exchange, but by restricting the use of wealth. Lycurgus
preserves the communal life of Sparta for centuries against disruption
on the one hand by inducing his fellow-citizens to resume the habits of
their forefathers, to sacrifice all artificial distinctions, under the
rigid but equal discipline of a camp which included among other things
the taking of meals in common, and on the other by enforcing a division
of the lands equally among the families and by the institution of a
currency deliberately created to restrict business operations within the
narrowest limits. It took the form of bundles of iron bars, and it
appears to have answered the purpose for which it was designed very
well, for the Spartans never became a commercial nation.

This state of things continued down to the Peloponnesian War, when the
Spartans, finding themselves at a disadvantage with Athens, inasmuch as
without coined money they could have no fleet, departed from the law of
Lycurgus. About the same time they threw over their system of land
tenure. Continual warfare reduced the number of Spartans, and the
accumulation of several estates in one family created disproportionate
wealth, a tendency which was facilitated by a law promoted by the Ephor
Epitadeus who granted liberty to bequeath property. Thus it came to pass
that instead of the 9,000 property-owning Spartansmentioned in the
regislation of Lycurgus, their numbers were reduced to 600, of whom only
100 were in full enjoyment of all civil rights. Naturally such economic
inequalities broke up the communal life. The poorer citizens found
themselves excluded from the active exercise of their civil rights, and
could not keep pace with the rich in their mode of living, nor fulfil
the indispensable conditions which had been imposed by Lycurgus upon
every Spartan citizen.

In Attica the problem was faced in a different way. Lycurgus solution
consisted not merely in putting the clock back, as such measures would
be called in these days, but by causing the clock to stand still. His
solution was a democratic one in so far as democracy is possible among a
slave-owning people. But Solon in Attica sought a remedy along different
lines. He accepted currency and the social changes which came with it,
and substituted property for birth as the standard for determining the
rights and duties of the citizens. He divided them into four classes,
which were distinguished from each other by their mode of military
service and the proportion of their incomes which was paid in taxation.
The lowest class paid no taxes at all, were excluded from public
offices, but were allowed to take part in the popular assembly as well
as in the courts in which justice was administered by the people. Like
Lycurgus, he sought to redress the inequalities of wealth, but, unlike
him, he sought a solution, not in the enforcement of a rigid discipline
upon the citizens, but by removing the temptation to accumulate wealth.
This was the object of his sumptuary laws, which were designed to make
the rich and poor look as much alike as possible, in order to promote a
democracy of personal habits if not of income. But though he did not put
the clock back as far as Lycurgus, he did put it back to the extent of
giving things in many directions a fresh start. It was for this purpose
that he cancelled the debts of the peasantry and effected a
redistribution of property, re-establishing the farmers on their
ancestral holdings. Though he failed to restrain usury, he sought to
mitigate to some extent its hardships by forbidding men to borrow money
on the security of their persons, while he took steps to redeem those
defaulting debtors who had been sold into slavery by their creditors,
using any public or private funds he could secure for the purpose;
while, further, he allowed the Athenians to leave their money to whom
they liked provided there were no legitimate male heirs. These reforms,
together with certain changes in the juridical administration, were the
most important of Solon's laws. He refused the supreme position in the
State, and after making his laws he went abroad for ten years to give
his constitution a fair trial. When he returned he found his juridical
reforms were very successful, but the economic troubles, though they had
been allayed, had not been eradicated. The peasants had been put back on
their holdings, but they had no capital and could not borrow money. They
did not blame Solon for his laws, but the magistrates for the way they
were administered. The State became divided into three hostile
parties---the men of the Shore, of the Plain, and of the
Mountains---each prepared to fight for its own economic and territorial
interests.

Fortunately at this crisis a man arose capable of handling the
situation. Pisistratus, who led the mountaineers, was not only a man of
statesmanlike qualities, but a noted soldier and a man of large private
means, and after some vicissitudes he succeeded in making himself
absolute master of the country. When in power he found a remedy for the
shortage of capital among the peasants, which was the source of their
economic difficulty, by advancing to them capital out of his own private
fortune. This provided them with a nest-egg which enabled them to tide
over the lean years, or while their trees were growing to maturity.
Their troubles were now at an end, and we hear no more about the land
question until the Spartans, towards the close of the Peloponnesian War,
came and ruined the cultivation.

Meanwhile, as a consequence of the development of foreign trade, Athens
became a maritime, commercial and industrial city in which
stock-jobbing, lending at usury, and every form of financial speculation
broke loose. This led to the division of the social body into two
distinct and hostile factions---a minority which possessed most of the
capital and whose chief concern was its increase, and a mass of
proletarians who were filled with enmity towards this aristocracy of
finance, which began to monopolize all political power. It was thus that
the religious aristocracy which for so long a period had governed Greece
was superseded by a plutocracy whose triumph Solon had unconsciously
prepared when he took income as a basis for the division of the classes.
During the Peloponnesian War the plutocracy became very unpopular
presumably for profiteering, to which wars give every opportunity---and
in Samos, Messenia and Megara the people, tired of economic subjection,
revolted, slew the rich, did away with all taxes, and confiscated and
divided landed property. The war entirely undermined all stability in
the Greek States, leaving behind it as a heritage an unemployed class of
soldiers and rowers which the social system was powerless to absorb.
They became a constant source of trouble, and from the Peloponnesian War
until the Roman Conquest "the cities of Greece wavered between two
revolutions; one that despoiled the rich, and another that reinstated
them in the possession of their fortunes." It was in order to find a
solution for this unemployed problem that Alexander the Great, at the
recommendation of Isocrates, undertook the conquest of Asia and planted
unemployed farm colonies of Greeks as far East as Kabul.

Reading Greek history reminds us of the fact that the Class War is not a
doctrine peculiar to the present age. But it is interesting to observe
that it entirely failed to effect a solution of the economic problem
which distracted Greece. Unregulated currency having given rise to
economic individualism and destroyed the common ownership of property,
the solidarity of society slowly fell to pieces. It had under mined
alike the independence of the peasantry and the old religious
aristocracy which had hitherto governed Greece, and had concentrated
power entirely in the hands of a plutocracy which, like all
plutocracies, was blind to everything except its own immediate
interests. It was thus that Greek society, from being united, became
divided into two distinct and hostile classes in which the possibility
of revolution became an ever-present contingency. The frequent
revolutions excited by the abuse of power of the plutocracy led to the
thinning of the agricultural population and the misery of the
inhabitants, and prepared the people to suffer without resistance---nay,
perhaps to welcome the Roman invasion and conquest.

Uncontrolled currency brought the same evils into existence in Rome,
where the concentration of capital in the hands of a few and its
accompanying abuses developed to a greater extent and far more rapidly
than in Greece, once they got under way. That they developed much more
slowly in the first instance was perhaps due to the fact that whereas
capitalism in Athens was a consequence of foreign trade, in Rome it was
intimately connected with the growth of militarism. This difference is
in all respects parallel to the difference in modern times between
capitalist development in England and Germany. For while in Greece, as
in England, the development of capitalism was a private affair due to
the initiative and enterprise of individual traders, in Rome, as in
Germany, it was closely associated with the policy of the Government.

Rome was originally a small agricultural state governed by an
aristocracy in which the Patrons and Clients, as the two classes of
society were called, bore much the same relation to each other as the
lord and serf of feudal times. The Patrons or Patricians, as they were
called at a later date, were expected by law and custom to defend the
Clients from all wrong or oppression on the part of others, while the
Clients were bound to render certain services to the Patrons. Just as
the spread of currency undermined the personal relationship existing
between the lord and the serf in the Middle Ages, substituting money
payments for payments in kind, so it may be assumed that the
relationship of the Patrons and Clients in the early days of Rome was
transformed by means of the same agency, for it was about the time of
the spread of currency among the Mediterranean communities that a new
order of things began to come into existence, when the hitherto
harmonious relationship existing between the Patrons and Clients was
replaced by one of personal bitterness. The bone of contention was the
severity of the law against debtors whereby the defaulting debtor became
the slave of the creditor, and as the debtor in nearly all cases was a
Client, it created bad feeling between the two classes.

The unpopularity of this law against debtors led to its abolition after
the fall of the Decemvirate in the fifth century before Christ. Interest
on loans was limited to 10%, and later to 5%, while an attempt was made
to abolish usury altogether. But the laws to abolish it proved
ineffectual. Needy borrowers resorted to usurious lenders, who took good
care that repayment was made one way or another. The Patricians appear
to have become very grasping and tyrannical, for we read of a series of
social disturbances between them and the peasantry over the question of
debts and the unwillingness of the Patricians to allow the peasantry to
have small holdings of their own. These disturbances were at length
brought to an end in the year 286 B.C., when the poorer citizens left
Rome in a body, out of protest, and encamped in an oak wood upon the
Janiculum. To appease this secession they were granted 14 jugera (about
9 acres) of land each and their debts reduced. For a hundred and fifty
years from this date until the appearance of the Gracchi we hear no more
of civil dissensions in Rome.

The great change which transformed Rome from an aristocratic and
agricultural society into a capitalistic and military one came about as
a result of the Punic Wars. Italy was left in a state of economic
distress and confusion, and the Romans were led to embark on a career of
conquest abroad in order to avoid troubles at home. Moreover, the Punic
Wars completely transformed the Roman character. From being a community
of hardy, thrifty, self-denying and religious people they became
avaricious, spendthrift and licentious. The immediate effect of these
wars was to depopulate rural Italy, for the substantial burgesses of the
towns and the stout yeomen of the country fell in great numbers during
these wars. To this evil must be added the further one that when the
campaigns were over and the soldiers returned home they had often
contracted licentious tastes and formed irregular habits which were ill
suited to the frugal life of the Italian husbandman. So it came about
that many who possessed small estates were eager to sell them in order
that they might enjoy the irregular pleasures of the city, while those
who possessed nothing also tended to gravitate there. Thus a flood of
emigration took place from the country to the towns. The countryside
became more and more depopulated, while the towns, and Rome most of all,
swarmed with needy and reckless men ready for any outrage.

These small estates and holdings passed into the hands of the great
Senatorial families, who were every day growing richer by the
acquisition of commands and administrative posts which were multiplied
by every successive war. They cultivated them by means of slaves, which
as a result of the wars now came on to the market in vast numbers, and
were sold by public auction to the highest bidders. The cheapness of
slave labour reacted to destroy the prosperity of such small free
cultivators as had remained on the land. These privately owned large
estates in turn tended to be replaced by enormous ones, administered by
joint-stock companies which Pliny believed to be the real cause of the
depopulation and decay of Italy. All the Public Lands of certain
provinces belonged at one time to a few families, and the Roman
dominions in Africa, comprising a great part of the north of that
continent, belonged to six persons only, whom Nero, later on, thought
well to put to death.

The growth of these joint-stock companies which made themselves the
masters of the commercial movement is to be traced to a law, passed just
before the second Punic War, which made it illegal for Senators to
engage in any commercial venture. In order, therefore, to furnish
supplies for the army and navy it became necessary to form companies
with sufficient capital to undertake the contracts, and in these
companies all the wealthy Romans, as well as officers of State, soldiers
and politicians, held shares. The Patrician families were no exception
to this rule, though they preferred to hold their shares in secret, not
caring to be compromised in the eyes of the public, or to show that they
were in any way indebted to the bankers and publicani (tax-gatherers),
who were at the head of the commercial movement and until the fall of
the Republic were the greatest power in Rome. Well has it been said that
"the history of Roman Property Law is the history of the assimilation of
*res mancipi* to *res nec mancipi*";I in other words, the assimilation
of real estate to movable property, of land to currency, of aristocracy
to plutocracy.

It was thus in Rome, as in Greece, that uncontrolled currency replaced
the class divisions based upon differences of function by class
divisions based upon differences of wealth. Financial companies invaded
all the conquered nations. There were companies for Sicily, for Asia,
for Greece, Macedonia, Africa, Bithynia, Cilicia, Syria, Judea, Spain
and Gaul. They had their headquarters at Rome, and the Forum became a
kind of stock-exchange in which the buying or selling of shares was
always going on and where every man was trying to outwit his neighbour.
These companies speculated in everything: in land, building, mines,
transport and supplies for the army and navy, and in the customs. This
latter was the central source of corruption. Every five years the taxes
of the provinces were put up to public auction, and that company which
made the highest bid secured the contract if proper security could be
given. When the contract was secured the successful company paid into
the Imperial Treasury the amount of their bid and made what profit they
could out of the transaction. All they collected over and above the
amount of their contract they kept for themselves. Naturally the system
led to extortion, since the more money the companies could extort from
the taxpayers the greater was their profit. The extortions incident to
this iniquitous system form a principal topic in the provincial history
of Rome, for the Roman Governors found it to their interest to support
the tax-gatherers on condition of sharing in the plunder. It has been
said that a Roman Governor needed to make three fortunes. The first was
to provide him with the means of buying the suffrages of the people or
of discharging the debts incurred in buying them; the second was to keep
for himself; and the third was to provide him with the wherewithal to
fight the actions in the courts which were certain to be brought against
him when he relinquished office.

It goes without saying that a system so corrupt could not but react to
corrupt Rome itself. The frequent laws against bribery at elections
which may be dated from the year 181 B.C. testify to the change that was
taking place. While money was extorted from the provincials, Rome itself
escaped taxation altogether, and this reacted to render the Senate an
entirely irresponsible body, for when they had now no longer any need to
ask the people for money they were subject to no real control and no
obstacle stood in the way of their acting as best suited their own
personal interest. All lucrative employments were seized by members of
the great Senatorial families, while a family that had once been
ennobled by office had so many opportunities for making money that it
became more difficult every day for a new man to make his way to the
Consulship or even into the Senate, which was fast becoming a hereditary
body of legislators. It was only when difficult military services were
required that they called in the services of independent men.

Now that successful warfare had proved itself so profit able to the
Senatorial families and the people had entirely lost control over them,
the lust for conquest became general. Wars were now no longer defensive,
even in pretence. Like the Germans, who appear to have copied the
methods of the Romans, the Senate resorted to the most detestable
practices in order to create internal dissensions in other countries.
They were determined to have a voice in all matters within their sphere
of interest, to make every possible excuse for Roman interference.
Senatorial commissions were continually being despatched to arrange the
affairs of other nations, for the Roman Senator had no doubt whatsoever
in his mind that his people were the strongest and most competent to
rule the world. And in the furtherance of their aims they were entirely
unscrupulous. The arrogance and brutality of this new aristocracy of
wealth knew no limits. They destroyed Carthage and Corinth out of
commercial rivalry, while Cicero relates that the Senate caused the
vineyards and olive-groves of Gaul to be destroyed, in order to avoid a
damaging competition with the rich Roman landlords,just as the Germans
for similar reasons sought to destroy the towns and industries of
Belgium and Northern France.

This period of Roman history should be particularly interesting to us,
as it presents so many striking analogies to the present day. Just as
the war promoted by the militarist capitalism of Germany has brought in
its train Bolshevism and the Class War, so the militarist capitalism of
Rome bore fruit in the slave revolts. As early as 181 B.C. 7,000 slaves
in Apulia were condemned to death for brigandage, where travelling had
become dangerous without an armed retinue. From attacking travellers
they had begun to plunder the smaller country houses, and all except the
very rich were obliged to leave the country. But there was not any
general revolt until 133 B.C., when the slaves of Sicily revolted. The
Romans there were now to feel the vengeance of men brutalized by
oppression. Clad in skins, and armed with stakes and reaping-hooks, they
broke into the houses and massacred all persons of free condition, from
the old man and matron to the infant in arms. Once the standard of
revolt was raised, thousands joined in, while the insurrection not only
spread over the whole of the island, but broke out in various parts of
the Empire. No one could tell where it would stop. For a time they met
with success, and defeated an army of 8,000 Romans, but in the end the
revolt was suppressed with great cruelty, though it took two years to
effect it. A second Slave War broke out in Sicily thirty years later,
and a third after the lapse of another thirty years, the latter being
led by a gladiator named Spartacus, after whom the German Bolsheviks
named their secret organization. Both of these revolts were suppressed
like the first one, and when at length slavery came to an end it was not
due to a successful revolt but to a changed attitude of the Roman
citizen towards the institution of slavery. During the first century of
the Empire, chiefly under the influence of the Stoic philosophy, as
later under that of Christianity, there had been growing up a feeling
that a slave was, after all, a human being, and had some claim to be
treated as such under the Roman law. Antoninus followed out this idea
both in legislation and in his private life, as did his successor also,
who adored his memory. They limited the right of a master over his
slaves in several ways; ordaining that if cruelty were proved against a
master, he should be compelled to sell the slave he had ill-treated.\"By
such means slavery gradually gives way to Feudalism, which we shall
consider in a later chapter.

Though these revolts were successfully suppressed, they shook the
complacency of the Romans. A force was set in motion which by a natural
sequence led to the Civil Wars and eventually to the Dictatorship and
the Empire. Before the Slave War actually broke out it was becoming
evident to thinking men that things could not go on in the way they were
going and that reform was becoming a matter of urgency. Tiberius
Gracchus, who now came to the front as a reformer, was the son of one of
the few Romans in whom any public spirit had survived. When travelling
through Etruria he had noted her broad lands tilled, not by free yeoman
as of old, but by slaves. Soon after this the Slave War broke out, and
as he had previously spoken his mind freely on this matter, public
opinion in Rome fastened on him as the man to undertake the work of
reform. After being elected a Tribune, he proposed to revive the
Licinian Law of 364 B.C. by which it was enacted that no head of a
family could hold more than 500 jugera (nearly 320 acres) of the Public
Land, modifying it only to the extent that permission was to be given to
every son to hold half that quantity in addition on becoming his own
master. It should be explained that by Public Land was meant land owned
by the Roman State of which there was much; for the Senate had retained
its hold on a large part of the land of Italy acquired by Rome, though
it was mostly leased to the great proprietors. To propose, therefore,
that no one should hold more than 500 jugera was to attack the great
landholders and companies who administered the vast estates, worked by
slave labour, and to seek to replace them by a free yeomanry. Those who
gave up possession were to receive compensation for improvements they
had effected.

After some difficulty Gracchus succeeded in getting his bill carried by
acclamation by the Assembly of Tribes. Within certain limits it was put
into operation, and there is reason to believe that it did some good in
regard both to depopulation and agriculture. But in order to get it
carried during his year of office---and if he could not manage it then
he would have to give it up for some time---he deliberately broke with
law and usage by carrying a bill deposing the Tribune who acted for the
Senate and was opposed to him. This violent and irregular procedure
provoked a resistance which cost him his life. He had laid himself open
to the charge of attempting to make himself master of the State, and as
it was a maxim of Roman Law that the man who aimed at tyranny might be
slain by any one, his enemies were not slow to take advantage of his
imprudence. He and many of his supporters were killed on the Capitol
when he had been Tribune for seven months, and the populace of Rome made
no attempt to save him. Nine years later his brother Caius Gracchus was
elected Tribune and took up his work, but he and his supporters were
likewise slain by their political enemies.

Whatever the Gracchi failed to do, they certainly shook the power and
prestige of the Senate. They gave it a blow from which it never
recovered. The cruel times that followed made the best men of both
parties regret the untimely end of those who had sacrificed wealth, rank
and tranquillity in the hope of reforming the State by peaceful methods.
But it was not to be done. The path to reform was blocked by the forms
of a constitution which had served their purpose while Rome was a small
City State, but became an anachronism when Rome became a world-wide
Empire; by the narrow spirit of the oligarchical faction, which was
opposed to all change from self-interested reasons; and lastly by the
mean and fickle temper of the mongrel population of Rome whose power was
sovereign in legislation and elections. These three factors in the
situation reacted upon each other, and finally precipitated political
chaos. The refusal of the Senate to face boldly the situation which was
developing and their resolve to keep power entirely in their own hands
ended by bringing them into contempt. They refused to listen to the
Gracchi; they had to listen to Marius. It was a true epigram that ran
"the blood of Gracchus was the seed sown and Marius was the fruit." For
there is a definite connection between the two. It was precisely because
the Senate refused the legitimate demands of reform that a situation
developed which mastered them. The Senate, like our own Government,
being entirely under the control of capitalist influences, developed
that same total incapacity to act except when pressure was brought to
bear upon it. And so it happened that a time came when unscrupulous
adventurers rose to power who understood the art of exploiting their
stupidity. While the oligarchy controlling the Senate found themselves
able to suppress revolts against their power from below, they found them
selves powerless to control the growing power of their own generals, the
jealousies between whom became a constant source of danger and anxiety
to the State, whose interests they were supposed to serve, and led
eventually to the civil wars which in the last century before Christ
brought the whole Roman system to the very brink of ruin.

The reason for these troubles is not far to seek. When Tiberius Gracchus
said, "The wild animals of Italy have their dens and lairs; the men who
have fought for Italy have light and air and nothing more. They are
styled the masters of the world, though they have not a clod of earth
they can call their own," he put his finger on the central weakness of
the Roman policy of warfare which created in Italy a landless
proletariat of desperate men. It became clearer to the people every day
that the governing class expected them to do the lighting while they
themselves were to take all the plunder. This realization led to the
growth of dissatisfaction which broke loose when the governing class, by
opposing the reforms of Gracchus, destroyed the confidence of the people
in their good intentions. The consequence was that as nobody felt any
loyalty to the Government, the instinct of loyalty which is natural to
the vast majority of men was transferred from the Republic to individual
generals, whom they regarded as their patrons. The Roman armies, which
were such excellent fighting machines, were composed of the soldiers of
Marius, of Sulla, of Pompey or of Caesar. Their swords were at the
command of any leader who offered a chance of booty. This new state of
things, which reached its height during the civil wars, took its origin
with the great Scipio. He had been refused levies by the Senate which he
deemed necessary for the invasion of Africa, and he raised volunteers on
his own credit, rewarding them with grants of land in Southern Italy.
Marius and Sulla held out prospects of booty to the men who served under
them, and so on until the fall of the Empire---the loyalty of the
soldiers had to be bought. It was the natural and inevitable consequence
of the destruction of a free yeomanry in Italy and the rise of a
professional soldier class. It is thus to be seen that there is a very
definite connection between the attitude of the governing class to the
reforms of Gracchus and the civil wars that followed forty-five years
later and which were finally brought to an end by the triumph of
Augustus.

With the advent of Augustus a new chapter in Roman history is opened.
The Republic gives way to the Empire, Roman society takes a new lease of
life; order begins to get the upper hand of anarchy. The immediate cause
of the change was that the Senate and Roman people, after bitter
experience became at last reconciled to the idea of despotism. They no
longer claimed the exclusive right to deal with the ever-increasing
administrative business of the Empire, and allowed Augustus a free hand
to deal with the chaos which had overtaken it as best he could. This he
did in the only way it is possible for a despot to govern---by means of
a highly centralized bureaucracy, which he superimposed over popular
institutions, many of which he restored, in form at least, where they
had fallen into decay. This may not have been an ideal solution of the
problems of the Roman Empire, but it was eminently practical. It
preserved Roman civilization for centuries from the fear of invasion
from without and from disruption from within. Augustus curbed the power
of the capitalists and placed the taxation of the Empire on a new basis
by the preparation of a Survey in which every house, field and wood was
duly valued by responsible officials, thus getting rid once and for all
of the system of extortion which was the central source of political
corruption. With his capable and loyal helper Agrippa, he travelled over
the whole Empire working hard at making settlements of all kinds, and
carrying on military operations where they were absolutely necessary.
Augustus found the Empire in a state of chaos, he left it a strongly
compacted union of provinces and dependent kingdoms.

But Augustus was too clear-headed a man to trust entirely to the
machinery of State. He understood that the satisfactory working of any
system of government depended ultimately on the character of the people,
and so he sought to promote a revival of the old Roman spirit. He called
the poets to his aid, and is said to have suggested to Virgil the
subject of the *Aeneid*, which came to be looked upon as almost a sacred
book, loved and honoured as much by Christian Fathers as by Pagan
scholars. He saw that if his government was to be stable, Rome and Italy
must be loyal, contented and at peace; and this he secured by what in
these days is called welfare work. "The city of Rome, with a population
of perhaps half a million, of all races and degrees, had been a constant
anxiety to Augustus so far, and had exercised far more power in the
Empire than such a mixed and idle population was entitled to. He saw
that this population must be well policed, and induced to keep itself in
order as far as possible; that it must be made quite comfortable, run no
risk of starvation, have confidence in the goodwill of the gods, and
enjoy plenty of amusements. Above all, it must believe in himself, in
order to be loyal to his policy. When he returned to Rome after crushing
Antony and Cleopatra, the Romans were already disposed to believe in
him, and he did all he could to make them permanently and freely loyal.
He divided the city into new sections for police purposes, and recruited
corps of watchmen from the free population; he restored temples and
priesthoods, erected many pleasant and convenient public buildings (this
incidentally giving plenty of employment), organized the supply of corn
and of water, and encouraged public amusements by his own presence at
them. He took care that no one should starve, or become so uncomfortable
as to murmur or rebel. On the other hand, he did not mean this motley
population to continue to have undue influence on the affairs of the
Empire. True, he gave them back their Free State, and you might see
magistrates, Senate and assemblies in the city, just as under the
Republic. But the people of the city henceforth had little political
power. The consuls and Senate, indeed, were far from idle, but the
assemblies for election and legislation soon ceased to be realities. In
elections no money was now to be gained by a vote, and in legislation
the people were quite content with sanctioning the wisdom of Augustus
and his advisers."

Though the reforms of Augustus preserved the Empire for centuries, they
preserved it at the expense of its vitality, for what Augustus
introduced was essentially what in these days we call the Servile State.
He maintained order by undermining the independence and initiative of
the citizens. This weakness gradually made itself felt, for as time wore
on the Roman Empire became increasingly an automatic movement of
machinery dependent entirely on the Caesar of Rome. The great extension
of governmental control led eventually to the incorporation of the
Collegia as subordinate adjuncts of the State. Exactly what these
Collegia originally were or eventually became we are not quite sure, for
our information about them is very scanty, and it is therefore unwise to
call them Guilds. It is probable they were originally friendly
societies, and we know that in the early days of the Empire they began
to undertake public duties. The Collegia of the building trade, for
instance, began to undertake the duties of a fire-brigade in Roman
towns, and this system of delegating functions to organized groups of
workers led to the formation of Collegia in different trades. The
Government having assumed responsibility for the provision of an
adequate food supply, privileges were granted to bakers, corn merchants
and shippers in the provinces. This happened at least as early as the
reign of Antoninus Pius. In the year A.D. 271 all the incorporated
Collegia were pressed into public service by Aurelian in order to
fortify Rome, and this appears to have been the beginning of a closer
association between the Collegia and the State. Severus Alexander, we
are told, "pursued the old policy of stimulating enterprise by
bounties," and incorporated "all industries whatsoever in Guilds and
regulated their status in the eyes of the law, which was doubtless a
step in the direction of finally converting them into the strictly
hereditary castes whose existence is pre supposed by the legislation of
the Constantinian epoch. Though the whole subject is one of great
uncertainty, it does appear that efforts were made in Rome to balance
the centralizing movement by decentralization as much as possible, and
that group organization began to come into existence.

The great defect in the constitution of the Empire was that as the
position of Emperor was elective the succession was never guaranteed,
and in the third century after Christ this led to serious disorders,
which, lasting for a hundred years, were finally brought to a close by
the Emperor Diocletian. But these things were only incidents in a
decline in which a certain demoralization overtook everything. The
provincial cities lost their initiative and energy. They became too
dependent upon the centralized Government which daily became more
paternal. The old virtues of courage and sacrifice vanished before the
growth of pessimism in which the populations, enervated by luxury and
sensuality, became feebler and feebler, until finally they were unable
any longer to offer effective resistance to the inroads of the
barbarians.

We may be sure then that Roman civilization would not have fallen had
not Roman society suffered from internal decay. The reforms of Augustus
merely delayed the final catastrophe; they could not prevent it, for
Roman civilization for centuries before, as we have seen, had been
rotten at the core. Successful warfare had made Rome wealthy, but it
left the increased wealth of the community entirely at the mercy of the
jugglers of finance, who were destitute of patriotism except in so far
as its claims coincided with the protection of their interests. It was
to protect the interests of these economic vampires that the
*enlightened* system of Roman Law was formulated. So often have we been
reminded of the gift that Roman Law is to civilization that most people
have accepted it without question, little suspecting the iniquity that
reigns at its heart. For the aim of Roman Law, unlike Greek Law, was not
to secure justice but to bolster up a corrupt society in the interests
of public order. Uncontrolled currency having led to capitalism and
capitalism having given rise to social disorders, Roman Law stepped into
the breach and sought by legalizing injustices to preserve order. It was
not concerned with moral principles. Its aim was not, like Mediaeval
Law, *to enable good men to live among badbut to enable rich men to live
among poor*. This it did by following the line of least resistance,
which was to give legal sanction to social injustices once established.
Hence the infamous Statute of Limitations, by which, after the
expiration of a certain period, the actual holder of an estate could no
longer be compelled to restore it to the true owner, unless the latter
should be able to show that within the prescribed time he had demanded
restitution with all the prescribed formalities. Well did Heine say of
this last condition that it "opened wide the door of chicanery,
particularly in a state where despotism and jurisprudence were at their
zenith, and where the unjust possessor had at command all means of
intimidation, especially against the poor who might be unable to defray
the cost of litigation. The Roman was both soldier and lawyer, and that
which he conquered with the strong arm he knew how to defend by the
tricks of law. Only a nation of robbers and casuists could have invented
the Law of Prescription, the Statute of Limitations, and consecrated it
in that detestable book which may be called the bible of the Devil---I
mean the codex of Roman Civil Law."

But the evil does not end here. Not only did the revived study of Roman
Law during the Middle Ages operate to undermine the communal relations
of society and re-establish private property, but in more recent times
it has brought confusion into thought about social questions by
diverting attention from the primary issue of currency and its
regulation to concentrate it upon the relatively secondary issue ot.
property. We shall see its sinister influence at work corrupting the
thought of the French Revolution as indeed of the Socialist Movement
to-day.

# Christianity and the Guilds

The underlying cause of the failure of Greece and Rome to grapple with
the economic problems which followed the introduction of currency is to
be found in the Pagan philosophy of life. That philosophy was one of
self-sufficiency and self assertiveness on a basis of sensuous
enjoyment, and as such was incapable of exercising a restraining
influence upon men when and where foreign trade and successful warfare
brought great wealth within their reach. The worship of materialism had
ended in leaving society at the mercy of economic problems which eluded
the efforts of statesmen and reformers alike. If, therefore, society
were ever again to recover its old-time solidarity and be lifted out of
the slough of despondency into which it had fallen, it was essential
that life and its problems should be faced in a spirit fundamentally
different from that of Paganism. This new spirit the world found in
Christianity: with the spread of its teachings the tide begins to turn
and a new chapter opened in the history of mankind.

In these days we are so accustomed to regard religious faith as
something essentially divorced from the ordinary routine of life that it
is difficult to realize that Christianity in the Early Church was as
much a gospel of social salvation in this world as of happiness in a
life to come. The two went hand in hand, and it was this that gave
Christianity the wonderful power which made it such a driving force. The
Early Church continued the communistic tradition of the Apostles. Thus
we read in Acts 2:--

>  Then they which gladly received this word were baptized; and the same
> day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. And they
> continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in
> breaking of bread, and in prayers. And fear came upon every soul; and
> many wonders and signs were done by the apostles. And all that
> believed were together, and had all things common, and parted them to
> all men, as every man had need.

And again, at the end of Acts 4 there is to be found another description
of their life:--

>  And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one
> soul: neither said any of them that aught of the things which he
> possessed was his own; but they had all things in common. And with
> great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord
> Jesus: and great grace was upon them all. Neither was there any among
> them that lacked; for as many as were possessors of lands or houses
> sold them, and brought the price of the things that were sold, and
> laid them down at the apostles feet: and distribution was made unto
> every man according as he had need. And Joses, who by the apostles was
> surnamed Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, the son of
> consolation), a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus, having land,
> sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the apostles feet

Looking at Christianity in the light of these texts, we find ourselves
in the presence of a creed whose aim it was to promote communal
relationships in society, for it is manifest that in the mind of the
Early Christians the Fatherhood of God involved the Brotherhood of man,
and *vice versa*. If men and women were to live together as equals, if
they were to share a common life and hold goods in common, they must
have in common ideas as well as goods, or there would be no cement to
bind them together. In order that common ideas might prevail amongst
them, they must acknowledge some supreme authority, some principle of
conduct which was above and beyond personal opinion. Above all, they
must be fortified in spirit against any temptation to private gain. If
wealth was not to obtain a hold upon them they must cultivate an
attitude of indifference towards riches. This was the gospel of Christ
in its social aspect. It taught men not to despise the world but to
renounce it, in order that they might acquire the strength to conquer.
In teaching this gospel Christianity introduced the world to a new moral
principle. Hitherto the world was divided between two opposed theories
of life or moral principles Paganism and Buddhism. The gospel of
Paganism had been to urge men to conquer the world, and it found an end
in despondency. Buddhism, realizing the moral failure which must
necessarily follow the pursuit of purely material aims, sought to solve
the problem by teaching men to renounce the world, which it taught was
illusion. Such an attitude towards life is repugnant to healthy-minded
men, as being merely an evasion of the whole problem of life.
Nevertheless, the choice was ultimately between Paganism and
Buddhism---for all religions clove to one or the other idea, until
Christianity appeared in the world, when by teaching men to renounce the
world in order that they might conquer it, it fused the two apparently
contradictory moral principles. It sought, as it were, by a strong
appeal to what was centripetal in his nature, to counteract the natural
centrifugal tendencies in man. It was through this new moral principle
that Christianity triumphed, for it proved itself to be a principle of
great dynamic power, capable of bracing up the moral fibre, and
inspiring heroism and a great awakening of human forces. The founders of
Christianity conclude by an earnest invocation of the end of the
world---i.e. the end of the existing social order, and not of the earth,
as is generally supposed and strange to say, their invocation was
realized. The lowly quiet man not desirous of riches came into his own.
He began to be respected, and was no longer treated with scorn, as he
had been under Paganism. From this point of view, the triumph of
Christianity may justly be regarded as a triumph of democracy. "In the
fourth century the Council of Constantinople was composed of bishops who
were ploughmen, weavers, tanners, black smiths, and the like."

Although pure communism survives to-day in the monastic orders of the
Roman Church, the communism of laymen did not last very long. Exactly
how long we are not quite sure, but it is generally assumed that it did
not survive apostolic days for any lengthy period. The reason does not
seem far to seek. Experience proves that communism in household
possessions is not compatible with family life, and it is to be assumed
that the Early Christians were not long in finding this out. But the
communal ownership of land is a different matter, and the effect of the
Christian teaching was undoubtedly to preserve for centuries the
communal system of land ownership of the barbarian tribes who overran
the Empire in the west, as it doubtless restored communal ownership in
places where it had disappeared. That confusion should exist in regard
to the attitude of Christianity and the Mediaeval world towards property
is, I am persuaded, due to the fact that St. Thomas Aquinas is regarded
as representative of the Mediaeval point of view. It is insufficiently
realized that his teaching about property was of the nature of a
compromise intended to reconcile stubborn facts with the communistic
teaching of the Gospel. In the thirteenth century, when he wrote, the
Church was already defeated. It had failed in the attempt to suppress
the revival of Roman Law, and the practical consequence of the failure
was that landlordism was beginning to supplant communal ownership. To
attack the institution of property as such was difficult, for the Church
itself was implicated. It was already immensely rich. It is said it was
in possession of a third of the land. In such circumstance, Aquinas
apparently thought the only practicable thing to do was to seek to
moralize property. Hence his endorsement of Aristotle's dictum "private
property and common use." Possession was not to be considered absolute,
but conditional upon the fulfilment of duties. A man might not hold more
property than that for which he had personal need. Although certain
forms of private property might be held, it must be administered in
accordance with the necessities of the holder's own position.
Superfluity was common, and the right and property of the poor. In
certain cases of necessity "all things became common."

It was the communistic spirit of Christianity that gave rise to the
Guilds. They were called into existence by the needs of protection and
mutual aid. The earliest Guilds, as might be expected, were religious
Guilds, and were voluntary associations. Their purposes were what we
would call social, as well as religious; their funds being expended on
feasts, masses for the dead, the Church burial fees, charitable aid, and
the like. Brentano tells us that the Guilds had a dual origin, and
resulted from the amalgamation of the sacrificial societies of the
barbarians with the religious societies of Christendom; he tells us that
the word Guild meant originally a festival or sacrificial feast, and was
applied subsequently to the company who thus feasted together.The Guilds
probably had historical continuity with the Roman Collegia, some of
which were partly craft and partly religious, others entirely religious.

With the dissolution of the Roman Empire it was natural that
associations should be formed for the purposes of defence. Such were the
Frith Guilds, which were compulsory associations, each with a corporate
responsibility for the conduct of its members. They provided also for
common aid in legal matters, such as defence against false accusation.
These Guilds, however, need not detain us any more than the great number
of other Guilds which existed for particular purposes, such as hunting
and fishing, for the repairing of the highways and bridges, and for
various other objects. We must pass on to the Middle Ages, when the
Guilds definitely became economic organizations, under the protection of
patron saints, for it is with economic Guilds that we are specially
concerned.

"The primary purpose of the craft Guild was to establish a complete
system of industrial control over all who were associated together in
the pursuit of a common calling. It enveloped the life of the Mediaeval
craftsman in a network of restrictions which bound him hand and foot. It
did not suffer the minutest detail to escape its rigid scrutiny and
observation. It embodied in its regulations a whole social system, into
which the individual was completely absorbed by the force of public
opinion and the pressure of moral and social conventions. It embraced
within its scope not only the strictly technical, but also the
religious, the artistic, and the economic activities of Mediaeval
society. It was first and foremost undoubtedly an industrial
organization, but the altar and the pageant, the care for the poor and
the education of the young, were no less part of its functions than the
regulation of wages and hours and all the numerous concerns of economic
life."

There can be little doubt that it was because the Guilds of the Middle
Ages were pervaded by religious sentiment that they were so successful
as economic organizations, for we must not forget that the sense of
brotherhood and human solidarity was restored to the world by
Christianity after it had been broken up by the growth of capitalism
under the Roman Empire. This sense of the brotherhood of mankind made
possible the Just Price which was the central economic idea of the
Middle Ages. It was an idea unthinkable in Rome, where conquest and
exploitation seemed but the natural order of the universe. The Just
Price left no room for the growth of capitalism by the manipulation of
exchange, for it demanded that currency should be restricted to its
primary and proper use as a medium of exchange.

It was this Mediaeval conception of the Just Price that, for the first
time in history, made the regulation of currency possible, and it is
only by relating all the Guild regulations to this central idea that so
many of them become intelligible. The Just Price is necessarily a fixed
price, and, in order to maintain it, the Guilds had to be privileged
bodies having an entire monopoly of their respective trades over the
area of a particular town or city; for it was only by monopoly that a
fixed price could be maintained, as society found to its cost when the
Guilds were no longer able to exercise this function. Only through the
exercise of authority over its individual members could the Guild
prevent profiteering, in its forms of forestalling, regrating,
engrossing, and adulteration. Trade abuses of this kind were ruthlessly
suppressed in the Middle Ages. For the first offence a member was fined;
the most severe penalty was expulsion from the Guild, which meant that a
man lost the privilege of practising his craft in his native town.

But a Just and Fixed Price cannot be maintained by moral action alone.
If prices are to be fixed throughout production, it can be done only on
the assumption that a standard of quality can be upheld. As a standard
of quality cannot finally be defined in the terms of law, it is
necessary, for the maintenance of a standard, to place authority in the
hands of craftmasters, a consensus of whose opinion constitutes the
final court of appeal. In order to ensure a supply of masters it is
necessary to train apprentices, to regulate the size of the workshop,
the hours of labour, the volume of production, and the like; for only
when attention is given to such matters are workshop conditions created
which are favourable to the production of masters. It is thus that we
see all the regulations---as, indeed, the whole hierarchy of the
Guild---arising out of the primary necessity of maintaining the Just
Price.

The elaborate organizations of the Guilds did not spring full-grown, but
were evolved gradually, as a result of experience in the light of the
central idea of the Just Price. Support is given to the thesis that, as
economic organizations, the Guilds grew up around the idea of the Just
Price, by the fact that when Guilds first made their appearance they
were not differentiated into separate trades. The first Guilds which
assumed economic functions were the Guilds Merchant,which the various
charters acknowledged as the ruling power within cities, and upon which
they confer not only the right of regulating trade, but the right of
municipal self-government. Being mixed organizations, they would
naturally be concerned primarily with the maintenance of a standard of
morality in commercial transactions. In the eleventh century, when the
first of these charters in this country was granted by the sovereign,
the towns were small, the largest not containing more than seven or
eight thousand inhabitants. Agriculture was still one of the main
occupations of the burgesses, and its produce one of the principal
elements of their trade. It was, perhaps, the smallness of the towns
that accounts for the fact that at that date craftsmen did not organize
themselves separately but became members of the Guilds Merchant, or, in
other words, of the municipality, for in those days the two were
identical. All concerned in industry, in whatsoever capacity, joined the
same organization. A comparatively small town would contain merchants
enough---each of them trading in several commodities---to form a Guild
Merchant, and at that time anybody who bought and sold anything beyond
provisions for daily use ranked as a merchant. The population, indeed,
would need to be much greater before separate trades could support
organizations of their own. This point of development was reached about
a hundred years later, when the Craft Guilds, after making their
separate appearance, finally substituted their collective power for that
of the Guilds Merchant, which survived as the municipality controlling
the separate Craft Guilds.

The immediate grievance that precipitated the struggle which ended in
the establishment of the Craft Guilds was the fact that membership of
the Guilds Merchant was confined to such as owned land in the towns. At
first there was no objection to this, because in those early days every
burgess held land. Gradually, however, a class of craftsmen appeared
that did not own land, and as these were excluded from the Guilds
Merchant, they rebelled. No doubt the craftsmen who were members of the
Guilds Merchant had their own grievances, for in a mixed organization it
invariably happens that those things which concern the majority or
dominant party receive attention, while the interests of the minority
are neglected. As, a century after the formation of the Guilds Merchant,
the craftsmen everywhere were in revolt, it is a fair assumption that it
was because they found their particular interests neglected. Anyway, it
is interesting to observe that the craftsmen who were the first to
rebel---the weavers and fullers---were those who did not produce
exclusively for a local market, and who would consequently be the first
to feel the tyranny of the middleman. When all circumstances are taken
into account, this explanation of the rebellion of the craftsmen seems
to me to be the only probable one. The explanation generally given by
economic historians, that the quarrel between the weavers and the Guilds
Merchant was due to the fact that as the Flemings had originally
introduced the weaving industry into England a certain proportion of the
men engaged in that craft would be of alien ancestry, and the Guild
merchants would in consequence be inclined to act unfavourably towards
them, has been disposed of by Mr. Lipson,who contends that it was not
that the Guilds Merchant desired to exclude the weavers, but that the
weavers declined to be brought within the jurisdiction of the Guilds
Merchant. It seems to me, however, that he errs when he offers as an
explanation of their refusal the purely selfish one that, having secured
special royal charters for themselves, the weavers strove to evade the
control of the Guilds Merchant in order to avoid the payment of taxes,
because it is reasonable to assume that special royal charters would not
have been granted unless the weavers could show due cause why they
should be accorded exceptional treatment, which suggests the existence
of a real grievance against the Guilds Merchant. If the motive had been
such as Mr. Lipson suggests, it is certain that all other crafts would
have supported the endeavour of the Guilds Merchant to bring the weavers
into line. The fact that the submission of weavers in the year 1300 was
speedily followed by the formation of separate Guilds for other crafts
clearly demonstrates that there was some general economic cause at work,
and this, I submit, was the grievance under which the producer has at
all times laboured---the tendency to fall under the domination of the
middleman. On the Continent these struggles between the Guilds Merchant
and the craftsmen developed into fierce civil wars, but in England the
struggle was not so violent. In both cases, however, the end was the
same. Political equality was secured, and political power in the
municipality passed out of the hands of the merchants into those of the
craftsmen, who organized separate Craft Guilds for each trade, these
Guilds henceforth buying the raw materials for their members and, in
certain cases, marketing their goods. The services of the merchants were
now dispensed with. What became of the merchants we hardly know, but
probably the Merchant Adventurers about whom we read later are a revival
of them. The whole subject, however, is obscure.

Within a century of the general establishment of Craft Guilds we find
that monopolies began to appear among them, and are followed by
struggles between the journeymen and the masters. Hitherto it had been
possible for every craftsman who had attained to "sufficient cunning and
understanding in the exercise of his craft" to look forward to a day
when he would be able to set up in business on his own account, and to
qualify as a master of his Guild, and in this connection it must be
understood that the Mediaeval Guild was not an organization which sought
to supplant the private individual producer by a system of co-operative
production. The Guild did not seek to organize self-governing workshops,
but to regulate industry in such a way as to ensure equality of
opportunity for all who entered it. About the middle of the fifteenth
century, however, a time came when this ideal could be upheld only with
increasing difficulty, for a class of skilled craftsmen came into
existence who had no other prospect beyond remaining as journeymen all
their lives. When once the permanent nature of these decayed
circumstances had become recognized, the journeymen began to organize
themselves into societies which are called by Brentano "Journeymen
Fraternities," and in Mr. Lipson's recent work "Yeomen's Guilds" which,
while accepting an inferior status as unalterable, sought to improve the
position of their members as wage-earners. There were strikes for higher
wages, sometimes with success. These fraternities, in other cases, acted
merely as defensive organizations, to combat a tendency towards a
lowering of the standard of living which seems to have made its
appearance about that time, and which was due to the same group of
economic causes which precipitated the Peasants' Revolt. The Peasants
Revolt will be dealt with in a later chapter.

It is interesting to observe that in the formation and organization of
the journeymen societies the Friars played an important part, as they
did in the organization of the Peasant's Revolt, a circumstance which
probably accounts for the fact that these fraternities were in the first
place formed as religious ones. The Master Saddlers of London complained
that "under a feigned colour of sanctity the journey men formed covins
to raise wages greatly in excess."From the outset the London Guilds
adopted a policy of repression towards them, but in other towns---as at
Northampton and at Oxford---spirit of compromise prevailed. At Chester
the bitterness became so intense that the quarrel was fought in quite a
Continental style, the Master Weavers attacking the journeymen with
pole-axes, baselards, and iron-pointed poles. Generally speaking, no
solution of the difficulty was arrived at. The journeymen waged a kind
of guerilla warfare against the masters, much as trade unions do against
capitalists to-day. In 1548 an Act of Parliament forbade the formation
of unions for improving conditions of labour, but this was when the
Guilds had for all practical purposes ceased to exist as organizations
regulating the conditions of production.

Critics of the Guilds are accustomed to point to these struggles as
testifying to the prevalence of a tyrannical spirit within the Guilds,
but such, however, is to misjudge the situation. It becomes abundantly
clear from a wider survey of the economic conditions of the later Middle
Ages---as we shall discover when we consider the defeat of the Guilds in
a later chapter---that, whatever evils the Guilds may have developed,
the changes which overtook them came about as the result of external
influences operating upon them from without, rather than through defects
which were inherent in their structure from the beginning. It cannot be
said of them that they carried within themselves the seeds of their own
destruction, as will readily be understood when it is remembered that,
as Mr. Lipson has said, "their underlying principle was order rather
than progress, stability rather than expansion"; or, as I would prefer
to put it, order rather than expansion, stability rather than mobility.
While it is clear that in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the
masters endeavoured, by making their admission fees prohibitive, to
exclude others from their ranks, it is manifest that this policy was
dictated by the instinct of self-preservation, when they were beginning
to feel the pressure of the com petition of capitalist manufacture. This
spirit of exclusiveness did not actuate the Guilds in their early days.
The problem then was not how to keep people out of the Guilds, but how
to get them in. The Guilds Merchant were willing at the start to extend
privileges to all who agreed to abide by the Just Price. When the Guilds
changed, it was because they had failed in their original aim of making
the Just Price co-extensive with industry, and were suffering from the
consequence of their failure. Looked at from this point of view, the
internal quarrels of the Guilds appear as the dissensions not of
victorious but of defeated men, not of the spirit which created the
Guilds, but of the spirit that destroyed them.

Even if this interpretation be not accepted, it would be irrational to
condemn the Guilds because they laboured under internal dissensions, for
on such grounds every human organization which existed in the past or
exists to-day stands condemned within certain limits, such dissensions
being in the nature of things. The experience of history teaches us that
all organizations need readjustment from time to time: the growth of
population alone is sufficient to cause thh. Moreover, every social
organization tends to develop little oligarchies within itself. Mr.
Chesterton has well said that "there happen to be some sins that go with
power and prosperity, while it is certain that whoever holds power will
have some motive for abusing it." From this point of view, the test of
righteousness in social constitutions is not that they do not develop
oligarchies and tyrannies, for all institutions tend to do this. Rather
let us ask what resistance may be organized against any such
encroachments on popular liberty, and it is the eternal glory of the
Guild system that such rebellion was always possible. The motto of the
old Liberals, that "the price of liberty is eternal vigilance," is, says
Mr. de Maeztu, no more than the organization of this jealousy of the
Guilds.\"I would respectfully recommend this idea to the consideration
of the Fabian and the Marxian alike, for it is the failure to perceive
this central truth of the Guilds that leads the one to place faith in a
soul-destroying bureaucracy, and the other in class war. These ideas are
but different aspects of the same error a complete inability to
understand what is the norm in social relationships. Shrinking from the
very thought of rebellion, the Fabian seeks the creation of a Leviathan
against which rebellion would be in vain; while, with an outlook equally
perverted, the Marxian imagines that the social struggle which is
inherent in any healthy society, and is necessary to effect periodic
readjustments, can, by a grand supreme effort be abolished once and
forever.

# The Mediaeval Hierarchy

"Heavy laborious work," says Heinrich von Langenstein, the Mediaeval
economist, \" is the inevitable yoke of punishment which according to
God's righteous verdict has been laid on all the sons of Adam. But many
of Adam's descend ants seek in all sorts of cunning ways to escape from
this yoke and live in idleness without labour, and at the same time to
have a superfluity of useful and necessary things; some by robbery and
plunder, some by usurious dealings, others by lying, deceit, and the
countless forms of dishonest and fraudulent gain by which men are for
ever seeking to get riches and abundance without toil.\"

It is because in every society a minority of men have always been, and
probably always will be, actuated by such anti-social motives that
government all at times is necessary. They bring to naught the dreams of
the philosophic anarchist and other kinds of social idealists the moment
any attempt is made to give practical effect to their theories. As it
was understood in the Middle Ages, the function of government was to
give protection to the community by keeping this type of man---the man
of prey---in a strict subjection. By insisting upon the maintenance of a
Just and Fixed Price, the Guilds were able to keep him under in the
towns where their jurisdiction obtained. It is for this reason that the
Guilds are to be regarded as the normal form of social organization in
the Middle Ages, for as the Mediaeval idea was that man should live by
the sweat of his brow, no other form of organization would have been
necessary, had all men been actuated by the best intentions. Outside the
towns, however, such economic control had not been established, because
a precedent condition of such control was never attained. In rural areas
the man of prey had never been brought entirely under military and civil
control, and it was the attempt to subjugate him that brought into
existence the Feudal System. The primary necessity of self-defence was
its *raison d'être*.

Such appears to be the probable explanation of the phenomenon of
Feudalism, for exactly how it came into existence is largely a matter of
conjecture. After the break-up of the Roman Empire, when Europe was
overrun by barbarian tribes and orderly government had broken down, the
man of prey found himself at large. Robber knights (or brigands, as they
would be termed in those days) made their appearance everywhere in
Western Europe, and preyed upon the industrious part of the population.
Divided into groups or clans, these people would find it expedient to be
permanently organized for the purposes of self-defence, ready always to
repel the raider whenever he chanced to make his appearance. It would be
necessary in such communities to carry on the dual vocations of
agriculture and defence. The clan would be divided into two sections,
the more adventurous spirits taking upon themselves the responsibility
of military defence, while the rest would agree to feed them: out of
such an arrangement it can be seen that the Feudal manor might gradually
arise. The fighting-men would tend to become a class apart, and would
claim rights and privileges over the non-combatant section of the
community. The chieftain of the fighting-men would become the lord, and
the fighting-men would be his retainers. This system would be imposed
upon other clans by means of conquest. The successful chief would divide
the conquered territory among his followers, and compel the conquered
peoples to become their serfs. In other cases, the Feudal relationship
would be established because some group of people sought the protection
of a superior lord.

Looking at Feudalism from this point of view, it may be said that while
its existence was due to the depredations of the robber knights, and
though these knights would have certain groups of workers at their
mercy, there would be other knights, or lords, who came into being as
protectors of the communal rights of the people. Such were the
chivalrous knights of romance and legend. By reason of the different
circumstances which had created the various Feudal groups---in fact,
according to whether they owed their existence to depredation or
defence---a different social life would obtain within the group. The
serfs would enjoy varying degrees of liberty. The serfs of the robber
knights would be tyrannized over, because the robber knights would never
feel their position to be secure; but the serfs of the chivalrous
knights would enjoy all the advantages of a communal life, for the
chivalrous knights, owing their position to popular election, would have
no desire to tyrannize. After the lapse of centuries and the changes
inevitable in an hereditary institution, the original character of the
groups, influenced by the changing personalities of the lords, would
tend to become modified.

Anyway, although William the Conqueror is popularly supposed to have
introduced the Feudal System into England, it is nowadays admitted that
it existed here long before the Norman Conquest, that much of it was not
developed until after the Norman period, and that at no time was
Feudalism a uniform and logical system, outside of historical and legal
textbooks. Feudal land was held in various ways and on various terms by
the villains, the cottiers, and the serfs. According to Domesday Book,
the last-mentioned did not exceed more than 16%, of the whole
population. In addition to these, however, there were the free tenants,
who did no regular work for the manor, but whose services were
requisitioned at certain periods---such as harvest-time---when labour
was required.

The principle governing the Feudal System was that of reciprocal rights
and duties, for lord and serf alike were tied to the soil. Although the
serf had to give half of his labour to his lord, it was not
exploitation, as we understand the term; for in return for his labour,
which went to support the lord and his retainers, military protection
was given to the serf. The amount of labour which a lord could exact was
a definite and fixed quantity, and was not determined merely by the
greed of the lord. The class division was primarily a difference of
function rather than a difference of wealth. The baron did not own the
land, but held it from the king on definite terms, such as furnishing
him with men in times of war, and of administering justice within his
domains. But in this country the baron rarely possessed that criminal
jurisdiction in matters of life and death which was common in
continental feudalism. He assisted at the King's Council Board, when
requested. To suit their own convenience, the barons divided up these
territories among their retainers, on terms corresponding to those on
which they held their own. It was thus that the whole organization
outside of the towns was graduated from the king, through the greater
barons, to tenants who held their possessions from a superior lord to
whom they owed allegiance.

Such was the principle of the Feudal System. Although the system was in
no way uniform in the majority of cases, it probably worked fairly well,
for the relation between the lords and the serfs was an essentially
human one. Based upon recognized services and rights, it was not a
barrier to good understanding and fellowship. In countries where
semi-feudal relationships still exist---as on many of the large estates
in these countries---in Cuba and Mexico, there is no feeling of personal
inferiority between master and man. A traveller from these parts tells
me that in Cuba it is the custom for owners of big plantations to
breakfast with their men. The owner sits at the head of the table with
his overseers, friends, and guests, and below the "salt" sit the
workmen, according to rank and seniority, down to the newest black boy.
Meeting on the plantation, the owner exchanges cigarettes with his men,
and they discuss with animation politics, cock-fighting, or the
prospects of the crop. Feudal England, I imagine, was something like
this, and not the horrible nightmare conjured up by lying historians,
interested in painting the past as black as possible, in order to make
modern conditions appear tolerable by comparison. Where there was a good
lord life would be pleasant, for the serf lived in rude plenty. The
defect of the system would be the defect of all aristocracies---that
where there was a bad lord redress would be difficult to obtain. For
though a lord might, in theory, be deprived of his fief for abuse of
power, the abuse would have to be very gross before such a thing could
happen. We are safe, I think, in concluding that where the lord was
inclined to be arbitrary it would be difficult to restrain him, though,
of course, as the people would in those days have the Church on their
side, their action would tend to modify the original proposition.

The Feudal System was essentially a form of organization adapted to a
stage of transition with no finality about it. A. the relationships
existing between the lords and the serfs were dictated primarily by
military necessity and based upon payment in kind, they were bound to
have been disintegrated by the growth of orderly government on the one
hand and the spread of the currency on the other. There was,
nevertheless, nothing in the nature of things why when Feudal society
did disintegrate it should have been transformed into landlordism and
capitalism, for as the old Feudal order was dissolved by the spread of
currency the agricultural population might just as conceivably have been
organized into Guilds. Moreover, I believe they would have been, but for
a change in the legal system which entirely undermined the old communal
relationships of the Feudal groups; or, to be precise, if the Communal
Law which had hitherto sustained Mediaeval society had not been
displaced by the revival of Roman Law. This issue we shall have to
consider in the next chapter.

Whatever misgivings Mediaevalists may have had respecting the
institution of Feudalism, they had none respecting the institution of
Monarchy. Feudalism they might regard as a thing of transition which was
bound to pass away, but the institution of Monarchy they contemplated on
quite a different plane. It was a part of the natural order of things,
and almost with one voice Mediaeval publicists declared monarchy to be
the best form of government. St. Thomas Aquinas defends the institution
of monarchy entirely on the grounds of practical expediency. One man
must be set apart to rule, because "where there are many men and each
one provides whatever he likes for himself, the energies of the
multitude are dissipated unless there is, also, some who has the care of
that which is for the benefit of the multitude.""A power that is united
is more efficacious in producing its effect than a dispersed or divided
power."The rule of the many nearly always ended in tyranny, as clearly
appears in the Roman Republic, which, while for some time the magistracy
was exercised by many enmities, dissensions, and civil wars, fell into
the hands of the most cruel tyrants.\"

There is here no suggestion of the Divine Right of Kings. That was a
post-Reformation idea and the invention of James I. The doctrine of the
unconditional duty of obedience to monarchs was wholly foreign to the
Mediaeval mind. Monarchs were instituted for the sake of the people, not
the people for the sake of the monarchs. "As a rule, each prince on his
accession was obliged to swear fidelity to all written and traditional
customs, and it was only after he had conferred a charter of rights that
fealty was pledged to him. Thus, Duke Albert IV of Bavaria directed that
every prince's son or heir should, on receiving the vow of fealty,
secure to the State deputies of the prelates, nobles, and cities, their
freedom, ancient customs, and respected rights; and pledge himself not
to interfere with them in any way. The formal clause, 'The land and each
inhabitant of it shall be undisturbed in his rights and customs,' was a
sure guarantee against the arbitrary legislature of the princes without
counsel, knowledge, or will of the Estate-General."

According, then, to the Mediaeval view, the king was not so much the
ruler as the first guardian of the State; not so much the owner of the
realm as the principal administrator of its powers and interests. His
power was not absolute, but limited within certain bounds. The principle
involved is the one which runs through all Mediaeval polity of
reciprocal rights and duties. All public authority was looked upon as a
responsibility conferred by a higher power, but the duty of obedience
was conditioned by the rightfulness of the command. "The Mediaeval
doctrine taught that every command which exceeded the limits of the
ruler's authority was a mere nullity, and obliged none to obedience. And
then, again, it proclaimed the right of resistance, and even armed
resistance, against the compulsory enforcement of any unrighteous and
tyrannical measure, such enforcement being regarded as an act of
violence. Nay, more, it taught (though some men with an enlightened
sense of law might always deny this) that tyrannicide was justified, or,
at least, excusable."Manegold of Lautenbach teaches that the king who
has become a tyrant should be expelled like an unfaithful shepherd.
Similar revolutionary doctrines are frequently maintained by the Papal
party against the wielders of State power. John of Salisbury
emphatically recommends the slaughter of a tyrant, for a tyranny is
nothing less than an abuse of power granted by God to man. He vouches
Biblical and classical examples, and rejects the use of poison, breach
of trust, breach of oath.St. Thomas Aquinas is against tyrannicide, but
is in favour of active resistance against tyrants, though he recommends
that "if the tyranny is not excessive it is better to bear it for a time
than, by acting against the tyrant, to be involved in many perils that
are worse than tyranny."

The paradox of the position was that it was precisely in the Middle
Ages, when there was nothing sacrosanct about the institution of
monarchy, that kings were popular and their lives were very much safer
than they are to-day. They were supposed to act impartially, to protect
the people against oppression by the nobles, and to be the impersonation
of justice, mercy, generosity, and greatness; and it is to be presumed
that it was because they did to some extent fulfil such expectations
that monarchy was popular. It was an ancient and generally entertained
opinion that the will of the people was the source of all temporal
power; but, while kings owed their authority immediately to the goodwill
of the people, it was felt that, ultimately, it was derived from God.
Which belief is an entirely rational one, for, considering that all
legitimate monarchies are hereditary, if God does not choose the actual
successor to the throne, then no one does. To accept God as the ultimate
source of authority was to the Mediaeval mind a much more satisfactory
explanation than the legal fictions with which moderns seek to escape
from the dilemma.

All earthly lordship is, however, limited by its nature. It is limited
by human and geographical considerations. Hence, in this world there are
many temporal powers. But the universe is one. If human intercourse is
to be possible, if temporal powers are to prevail, there must be certain
common standards of morals, of thought and of culture. If these are to
be upheld in the world, they must rest on certain fixed and unalterable
dogmas. There must be the recognition of an ultimate good, a true and a
beautiful. But men, owing to their limitations, are incapable of
determining the nature of these. Left to themselves, they tend to
emphasize their points of difference and to lose what they have in
common. They will worship material things, and, like the builders of
Babel, end in a confusion of tongues, no man knowing what to or what not
to believe. Hence the need of Divine interposition to reveal to the
world the nature of the truth by which alone mankind can live, and to
secure its recognition among men. Hence, also, the Christian Church,
which exists to uphold in the world the revealed truth which otherwise
would be forgotten, and to transmit the truth, pure and undented, from
generation to generation. And hence, again, the priority of the
Spiritual over the Temporal Power, of the Church over the State. For the
State, being of its nature earthly, maintains itself by considerations
of expediency, and, apart from the daily reminder of permanent truth
which the existence of a spiritual power gives, would place its reliance
entirely in the sufficiency of material things.

Such was the Mediaeval conception of the social order. It rested upon
the constitutive principle of unity underlying and comprehending the
world's plurality. The Medievalists reconciled the philosophical
contradiction implied in the simultaneous existence of the one and the
many by accepting in the visible world a plurality of temporal powers,
supported and sustained by the indivisible unity of the spiritual power.
Along with this idea, however, came the necessity of the division of the
community between two organized orders of life, the spiritual and the
temporal; for it was maintained that the care of the spiritual and moral
life of the community---the whole-hearted pursuit of wisdom---was
incompatible with political administrative work. Granting certain pre
supposed conditions, Church and State were the two necessary embodiments
of one and the same human society, the State taking charge of the
temporal requirements, and the Church of the spiritual and supernatural.
Hence the Holy Roman Empire, the Mediaeval conception of which was that
of two swords to protect Christianity, the spiritual belonging to the
Pope and the temporal to the Emperor. Although it claimed continuity
with the Roman Empire, it was in no sense an attempt to revive the idea
of universal monarchy, since it was laid down that the Emperor, though
he was the first and august monarch---the highest of Papal vassals---was
not to aim at the establishment of a universal monarchy, the destruction
of nationalities, or the subjection of other nations to his personal
rule. On the contrary, it was the mission of the Church to achieve an
ideal union of mankind by changing the heart and the mind of man. What
was required of the Emperor was that, in the first place, he should seek
to establish amongst the nations a system of organization---a League of
Nations, as it were---which should arbitrate on international questions,
in order that war among Christian nations might be brought to an end. In
the next, it was to be his duty to lead the Christian princes in defence
of the Faith against all unbelievers.This Mediaeval Empire, which dates
from the year 800, when Charlemagne was crowned Emperor of the West by
Pope Leo III, continued to exist until the end of the eighteenth
century, when what remained of it fell finally before the armies of
Napoleon; but until the thirteenth century, when its decline definitely
set in, it was the centre of European national life and as a matter of
fact it did succeed in preserving peace in Central Europe for centuries.
It is of more than passing interest to note that the sinister influence
which undermined its power was precisely the same one which corrupted
Mediaeval civilization, and has led to the anarchy and confusion of the
modern world.

Modern historians are accustomed to look upon the inauguration of the
Holy Roman Empire as the great mistake of the Middle Ages, inasmuch as,
by giving rise to a long succession of quarrels between the two heads of
Christendom it led to a spirit of religious and political intolerance.
Such a judgment is perhaps a superficial one, for there was nothing in
the original conception of the Empire which would necessarily have
produced such results. At the time of its first promotion a strong case
was to be made in its favour. Christendom was then in great danger of
being overthrown by the Saracens, while the Papacy lived in fear of the
Lombards. The Church was sorely in need of a temporal defender. Twice
did Charlemagne cross the Alps to rescue the Papacy from the clutches of
the Lombards, thus bringing temporal security to it. The great quarrel
between the Popes and the Emperors over the Right of Investiture, which
terminated early in the twelfth century, defined the respective spheres
of influence of the Spiritual and the Temporal Powers. Once this source
of difficulty had been removed, there is no reason to suppose that, in
the ordinary course of things, the doctrine as taught by Pope Gelasius
in the fifteenth century, that "Christian princes are to respect the
priest in things which relate to the soul, while the priests in their
turn are to obey the laws made for the preservation of order in worldly
matters, so that the soldier of God should not mix in temporal affairs
and the worldly authorities have naught to say in spiritual
things,"which was accepted prior to the quarrel over Investiture, might
not have been resumed when the quarrel was ended. Unfortunately for the
success of the Empire, an indirect consequence of the quarrel was the
revival of Roman Law, and this, by raising issues of such a nature as to
make compromise impossible, destroyed for ever the possibility of
co-operation between Church and State. After this revival, the issue was
no longer one of defining the respective spheres of influence between
the two authorities, but the more fundamental one of whether
considerations of principle or of expediency should take precedence;
whether, in fact, there was a higher law which earthly monarchs should
obey, or whether law should be dependent entirely upon the personal will
of princes. This issue was fundamental, and, as I have already said, it
made compromise impossible. As compromise was impossible, co-operation
was impossible. It became a question of who should rule; whether the
Church would consent to make herself subservient to the ambitions of
princes, or whether political arrangements were to be regarded as part
and parcel of the ecclesiastical organization. As the Emperors sought to
encroach upon the prerogatives of the Church, the Popes strove to attain
temporal power, and the struggle resulted in corrupting both Church and
State, and in breaking up the Mediaeval social order. In proportion as
the Holy See succeeded in this aim it became increasingly secularized,
its territorial possessions leading it to subordinate spiritual duties
to acquisitive ambition. When, after the Great Schism in the earlier
part of the fifteenth century, the Popes succeeded in asserting their
final and triumphant absolutism, they became to all intents and purposes
mere secular princes, by whom religion was used as an instrument for the
furtherance of political ambitions. Their enormous revenues were spent
upon the maintenance of Papal armies and fleets and a court unrivalled
in its magnificence and corruption. This state of things continued until
the Reformation came upon the Church as a scourge from God and paved the
way for the counter-Reformation, when the Church, after the loss of her
temporal authority, found recompense in a renewal of her spiritual
vitality.

# The Revival of Roman Law

Mention was made in the preceding chapter of the revival of Roman Law,
which was incidental to the quarrels between the Popes and the Emperors,
and eventually broke up Mediaeval society and inaugurated the modern
world. The importance of this revival demands that more should be said
about it.

To understand exactly what is meant by the revival of Roman Law it is
first of all necessary to realize that though, as a completely codified
system resting upon the will of the Emperor, Roman Law had fallen
largely into desuetude, it did not disappear entirely from the world
after the fall of the Roman Empire. While retaining their own laws and
customs, which were communal in character, the barbarian tribes that had
invaded the Empire and settled within its borders, incorporated in their
tribal codes certain of the Roman laws that did not clash with their
communal arrangements. Definite information upon this period is lacking,
but it is to be assumed that the Roman laws which they adopted were of
the nature of rules and regulations rather than such as were concerned
with conduct. It is natural to make this assumption; because, in the
first place, of the existence of a large body of law, best described as
regulations, which has to do with public convenience, and is not to be
directly deduced from moral considerations (the rule of the road is a
well-known example of this kind of law), might be readily adopted by
peoples possessing a social and economic life entirely different from
the Roman one; and in the next because, as the Roman method is
essentially adapted to the needs of a personal ruler, it would be
natural that the chiefs of the tribes would avail themselves of the
decisions on delicate points of law which had been arrived at by the
Roman jurists. It was for this reason that the study of Roman Law had
never been entirely abandoned, and the Visigothic compilation became the
standard source of Roman Law throughout Western Europe during the first
half of the Middle Ages. Together with the Canon Law of the Church,
Roman Civil Law was studied at the ecclesiastical faculties of
jurisprudence, for learning during the so-called Dark Ages meant little
more than the salvage of such fragments of ancient knowledge as had
survived the wreck of Roman civilization.

Though parts of the Roman Code which were concerned with matters of
convenience became incorporated in the tribal law of the barbarians,
Roman Law in its fundamental and philosophic sense had been abandoned in
favour of the Canon Law of the Church. The latter, which consists of the
body of laws and regulations made or adopted by ecclesiastical authority
for the government of the Christian organization and its members,
differs as a judicial science from Roman Law and Civil Law, inasmuch as
it is primarily concerned with the conduct of another society, the
Kingdom of God upon Earth. As such, its ultimate source is God. It
consists of Apostolic letters, ordinances of the Councils, and Papal
Bulls, briefs, or decretals. It was not yet, however, a definitely
codified system, and did not become one until the twelfth century, when
Gratian gave it a systematic form. Prior to the time of Gratian, the
Canon Law took the form of decisions pronounced in cases submitted to
the Pope from all parts of Christendom. By such means the Christian rule
was brought into relation with the communal life of the tribes, and a
body of law was coming into existence capable of maintaining the
communal life of the people along with a higher and more complex
civilization. But the promise of a society which might have realized the
Kingdom of God upon Earth was never fulfilled, and it was not fulfilled
because of the sinister influence of Roman Law, which was resurrected to
break up the unity of Christendom.

The circumstances that led to the revival of Roman Law are immediately
connected with the great quarrel over the Right of Investiture which
became such a burning issue during the pontificate of Gregory VII. The
organization of the Church had been a haphazard growth. The Church
shared in feudal land-holding; in addition to the tithes, immense
estates had come into her possession, by bequests from the faithful, or
through the labours of the monastic orders, who had reclaimed vast
tracts of waste land. For the defence of her property the Church
resorted to secular means. Bishops and abbots, confiding their domains
to laymen, on condition of assistance with the sword in case of need,
became Temporal Lords---with vassals to fight for them, and with courts
of justice---exercising all the privileges common to lay lords. On the
other hand, there were bishop-dukes, bishop-counts, and the like, who
were vassals of other lords, and especially of the king, from whom they
received the investiture of their temporalities. In some cases, abbeys
and churches had been founded by the faithful on condition that the
right of patronage---that is, the choice of beneficiaries---should be
reserved for them and their heirs. Thus in various ways ecclesiastical
benefices were gradually transformed into fiefs, and lay suzerains
claimed the same rights over ecclesiastics as over other vassals from
whom they received homage and invested them with the emblems of their
spiritual offices.

Had this system not been grossly abused, it might have continued
indefinitely. During the vacancy of a bishopric or abbey, its revenues
went to fill the royal treasury, and when short of money, monarchs
everywhere took advantage of their positions as patrons and allowed
benefices to remain without pastors for long periods. The Emperor Otto
II was charged with having practised simony in this connection; while
under Conrad II the abuse became prevalent. At the close of the reign of
William Rufus, one archbishopric, four bishoprics, and eleven abbeys in
England were found to be without pastors. At a Synod of Reims in 1049
the Bishops of Nevers and Coutances affirmed that they bought their
bishoprics. The system led, moreover, to favouritism. Lay authorities
interfered in favour of those in whom they were interested, so that, in
one way and another, the system became a crying scandal and Gregory VII
resolved to put a slop to it. He considered, too, that it was
intolerable that a layman, whether emperor, king, or baron, should
invest ecclesiastics with the emblems of spiritual
office---ecclesiastical investiture should come only from ecclesiastics.
It was this that led to the great struggle over the Right of
Investiture. To the Emperor Henry IV it was highly undesirable that the
advantages and revenues accruing from lay investiture should be
surrendered; it was reasonable, he thought, that ecclesiastics should
receive investiture of temporalities from their temporal protectors and
suzerains. After a bitter struggle, which was carried on all over
Christendom, a compromise was agreed upon and ratified at the Diet of
Worms in 1122. The Emperor, on the one hand, preserved his suzerainty
over ecclesiastical benefices; but, on the other hand, he ceased to
confer the ring and crozier, and thereby not only lost the right of
refusing the election on the grounds of unworthiness, but was deprived
also of an efficacious means of maintaining vacancies in ecclesiastical
offices.

Meanwhile, the dispute led to the establishment at Raven na of a faculty
of jurisprudence, under the patronage of the Emperor, which had
important consequences. Countess Matilda of Tuscany---a staunch
supporter of Gregory VII---in 1084 sought to counteract the influence of
this Imperialistic school by the creation of a centre for the study of
Roman Law that would act on the Papal behalf; and it was in connection
with this school at Bologna that Irnerius, who had already taught
didactics and rhetoric, began to devote himself to the study of
jurisprudence. Prior to this date the study of Roman Law had been
traditional rather than scholarly. Exponents of the law did not go back
to the original sources of legal science, but took the law very much as
they found it---as a thing of custom or tradition, whose credentials
they had no reason to suspect. Irnerius, however, abandoned this more or
less casual method study in favour of a return to the original sources
of Roman Law, taking the Justinian Code as a guide. It is from this new
departure that the revival of Roman Law is to be dated.The researches
undertaken in the first instance to strengthen the Papal case against
the Emperor had results very different from what had been intended. They
resulted in the revival of a theory of law which was favourable to the
Emperor rather than to the Pope, and which immediately caused the
struggle between them to be embittered, by raising in an acute form the
question of supremacy, and eventually undermining Mediaeval civilization
by dethroning the Canon Law in favour of the Roman Code.

That the Glossators, as the pioneers of this revival were called, did
not foresee the consequences of their work---that they did not see that
they were seeking the promotion of a system of law antipathetic to
everything that Christianity stood for---is probably true. At the same
time, there is no reason to doubt that it was the superficial brilliance
of the Roman Code which led them astray. They were infatuated by its
beauty, its searching analyses, its logical deductions, and brilliant
explanations. It had such a simple and plausible way of dealing with
immediately practical issues that they came to regard it as the very
embodiment of common sense, and deemed it to be entitled to the same
universality of application as the laws of mathematics and logic, little
suspecting the iniquity that reigned at its heart. It was, as we saw in
the first chapter, originally formulated for the purpose of preserving a
capitalistic and corrupt society from premature dissolution, and we
shall see that its revival, by seeking always the promotion of
individual and private interests at the expense of communal and public
ones, operated to introduce into Mediaeval society the same evil
elements as had corrupted Rome. Unable to conceive the practical
possibility of realizing justice in a society whose communal ties had
been dissolved by an unregulated currency, Roman Law had addressed
itself to the more immediately practicable though less ambitious task of
maintaining order. This it achieved by disregarding moral issues, by
inculcating the policy of following always the line of least resistance
(thus exalting momentary expediency above considerations of right), by
giving legal security and sanction to private property (no matter by
what means it had been obtained) as the easiest way of avoiding
continual strife among neighbours. It was, in fact, a system of law
designed primarily for the purpose of enabling rich men to live among
bad, as emphatically as the Canon Law was designed to enable good men to
live among bad; for while the Canon Law based its authority upon the
claim of right, the ultimate appeal of Roman Law was to might rather
than to right, since, according to it, right and wrong are not eternally
fixed and immutable principles not something above and beyond personal
predilections but are dictated entirely by considerations of expediency
and convenience. In a word, the Roman Law does not conceive of law as a
higher authority over men---as a development of the moral law---but
postulates the existence of a divorce between law and morality as two
entirely incompatible and opposed principles.

Naturally, systems of law differing so fundamentally as the Roman and
the Canon Laws sought the support of different sanctions. The Canon Law,
as we saw, rested on the assumption that there was a higher law of the
universe, and that all justice proceeds from God. Accordingly, it
happened under Canon Law that the ruler was merely a functionary---the
agent or director of right---exercising power conditionally upon the
fulfilment of duties which were enjoined upon him. On the contrary,
Roman Law, substituting order for justice as the aim of law, sought its
ultimate sanction in the will of the Emperor, whom it invested with
sovereign power, declaring him to be the source of all law, which could
only be altered by his own arbitrary decree, in general as in individual
cases. This was a natural and inevitable deduction from the Roman
theory. Making no claim to supernatural revelation, it was driven by
this self-imposed limitation to search for authority not in the
ascendancy of truth, of ideas, or of things, but in the authority of
persons, finally in one person---the Roman Emperor. Hence it is that
Roman Law is by nature opposed to democratic ideals. For whereas, under
Canon Law, it can be maintained that if the ruler is merely a
functionary exercising powers conditionally upon the fulfilment of
certain duties he may be challenged if he fail in them, there can be no
appeal on a basis of principle or right against the kind of authority
exalted by Roman Law, for how can the king do wrong if the source of law
resides in his personal will. In consequence, rebellion against the
abuse of authority in all countries where Roman Law obtains takes the
form of an appeal from the Divine Right of Kings to the Divine Right of
the People; that is, from one will to many wills. And this can merely
increase the confusion, since as apart from the recognition of the
existence of an authority which transcends the individual will no
agreement is possible among a multitude of wills, reaction to the
authority of an autocracy can only be a matter of time. It is a vicious
circle from which there is no escape, as the modern world must discover
sooner or later.

The tendency inherent in Roman Law towards autocracy was not long in
manifesting itself. The Commentators, who succeeded the Glossators, led
the way. Perceiving that their own personal interests were to be served
by espousing the cause of the Emperor rather than that of the Pope, they
declared that the Roman Empire still existed inasmuch as the Roman
Emperors of the German Empire were the legal successors of the Emperors
of Rome, and that, in consequence, the will of the Emperor was still law
and the Justinian Code binding. This speciousness is, however, to be
regarded as the merest camouflage. In the first place, because
subsequent developments suggest that this dogma of continuity was
advanced only because the lawyers found in it a convenient fiction
whereby the rule of the lawyers might be substituted for the rule of
Emperor and Pope alike; and in the next place, because it so happened
that while, in theory, what was received was the law of Justinian's
books, in practice what was received was the system which the Italian
Commentators had long been elaborating, and, as Gierke insists, this was
an important difference. The system which the Commentators advanced was
a thing of compromise between the old Roman Law and the existing German
Law. It was the thin edge of the wedge; it was designed to give
immediate practical results, and it was successful. A start was made,
and as time wore on the system became more and more Roman, and less and
less German, until, eventually, it became almost purely Roman.The
Hohenstaufen family fell into the trap which the Commentators had so
carefully prepared for them. They accepted the decision of the
Commentators as a justification of their absolutism, and henceforth did
all in their power to secure the acceptance of the new code. Frederick
Barbarossa at once claimed for himself all the rights which the Caesars
had exercised, and Roman Law was used by the Emperors as a weapon
against Canon Law in ecclesiastical-political disputes. These new
developments aroused the opposition of the Church, which set itself
against the spread of Roman Law. In 1180 Pope Alexander III forbade the
monks to study the Justinian Code. In 1219 Honorius III extended this
prohibition to all priests, and in the following year he forbade laymen,
under pain of excommunication, to give or listen to lectures on the
Justinian Code in the University of Paris. In 1254 Innocent IV extended
this last prohibition to France, England, Scotland, Spain, and Hungary.
But such prohibitions were of no avail. Roman Law found support among
the secular princes, and it was proving itself too profitable to those
who followed it to be easily sup pressed under such circumstances. It is
said that so eager were students to acquire a knowledge of it that at
one time the study of theology was almost abandoned.

Meanwhile, efforts were made to meet the danger by more positive
measures. In 1151 Gratian published the *Decretum*, in which the
materials collected by a succession of Canonists were re-edited and
arranged with a superior completeness. His labours paved the way for the
first official code of Canon Law which was promulgated by Gregory IX in
1234. It was hoped that the publication of this Papal law-book would, by
defining the issues, settle the dispute once and for all; but,
unfortunately, it did nothing of the kind. The struggle between Church
and State increased in intensity and bitterness. In the year 1302
Boniface VIII promulgated his famous Bull, Unam Sanctum, in which the
case for Papal supremacy was set forth. Its main propositions were drawn
from the writings of St. Bernard, Hugh of St. Victor, St. Thomas
Aquinas, and the letters of Innocent III. As such, it summarizes the
conclusions of thirteenth-century thinkers on the relations of Church
and State. The claim for supremacy rests on the affirmation that the
spiritual authority is higher than the temporal authority, that the
Church, as the guardian of the Christian law of morals, has the right to
establish and guide the secular power, and to judge it when it does not
act rightly.It was the last desperate attempt which the Papacy made to
save Christian morals from corruption at the hands of the Roman lawyers.
It did not have the desired effect, for the secular authorities treated
with scorn the idea that they should surrender unconditionally to the
Pope. It was a situation that would never have arisen but for the
revival of Roman Law. The Popes found themselves in a difficult
position. The choice, as they saw it, was between allowing the whole
fabric of Mediaeval civilization to be undermined by the worst of Pagan
influences, or of asserting the supremacy of the Papacy in secular
affairs. It was a desperate remedy to seek, and one conceivably worse
than the disease. It was an attempt to seek to effect by external means
a change that can come only from within. Experience teaches us that
reform cannot be imposed from without in that kind of way. But what is
so easy for us, with the experience of attempted reform behind us, to
see to-day was not so easy to see in the Middle Ages, when methods were
still untried, and in justice to the Mediaeval Papacy we ought at least
to acknowledge that, whatever motives may have actuated it, whatever
mistakes it may have made, it fought, at any rate, on the right side. It
did not allow civilization to become corrupted, exploitation to be
legalized, without first making desperate efforts to prevent it; and,
though the Church itself in turn became corrupted by the evil influences
which had been let loose upon the world, it resolutely fought them so
long as the issue was doubtful.

Although the Roman lawyers had been encouraged and patronized by the
Emperors, it was not until the fourteenth century, when Charles IV
assigned to jurists of the Roman School positions in the Imperial
chancery, placing them on a par with the lower nobility, that Roman Law
began to exercise much influence in Germany. Henceforth the Roman
lawyers used all their influence and energy in securing recognition of
the Roman Code as the one most fit for universal application. In 1495
the "Reichskammergericht"--the central Imperial Court---deliberately
adopted Roman Law for its guidance as the common law of the Empire. In
1534 and 1537 the principalities of Julick and Berg (in the Rhine
province) resolved to remodel their laws on the Roman pattern, in order
to avoid clashing with the central Imperial Court. Under the influence
of such considerations the movement towards the codification of local
laws, on the basis of their reformation and of the reception of Roman
doctrine, sweeps over Germany. The towns of Worms and Nuremberg (1479)
were among the first to carry through such reformations. Most of the
monarchically organized principalities followed suit, with the notable
exception of some of the North German States, which remained faithful to
the jurisprudence of the Sachenspeigel--of which we shall speak
hereafter. Hitherto faculties of jurisprudence, consisting mainly of
experts in the Canon Law, had been complements of the theological
faculties. Now, however, foundations were made in the German
universities for the teaching of Roman Law as a secular study.

The reception of Roman Law appears mainly as a movement of the upper
classes and of the political authorities connected with them. Once it
had succeeded in establishing itself at the top, dependent bodies found
it to their advantage to come into line. Its rapid spread in the German
towns in the early sixteenth century was due primarily to the rapid
expansion of German commerce about that time, which created a demand for
a uniform system of law. Mediaeval Law, where it was not of Canonical
origin (that is, the law of tribal origin), was a local affair. As a
unity, German Law did not exist at the close of the Middle Ages. It was
broken up into countless local customs, which, for this very reason,
were unable to tackle the wider problems of civil intercourse consequent
upon the expansion of trade. The fundamental principle of German
Customary Law amounted to a recognition of the right of each group of
citizens to apply its own customary ideas to the dealings of members
with one another. The law of knights and of fees was differentiated not
only from the law of the country in general but also from municipal law,
guild law, and peasant law; while, further, there was the great cleavage
between the lay and the ecclesiastical courts. The laws of these
different groups remained in close touch with popular conceptions, and
sometimes attained considerable eminence in their treatment of legal
problems, but they were not connected with any legal system and lacked
precision in details. Most legal questions had to be settled finally by
unwritten or unenacted law, which had to be "found" for the purpose.
Thus it came about that at the very moment when in Germany the social
and economic unit was changing from a local to a national one, when
German society was enjoying a kind of hothouse prosperity, resulting
from its commercial relations with Italy and the Levant on one side and
with the Scandinavian North, Poland, and Russia on the other, German
Customary Law was crippled by the absence of a common code of laws and a
lack of professional learning. Further progress was possible only
through providing a remedy for these defects, and this the Roman lawyers
were able to do. They triumphed because at this critical period they
were able to supply a felt need for a uniform system of law. Mediaeval
Customary Law went down not because it was not good law, not because it
was by its nature unfitted for grappling with the problems of a wider
social intercourse, but because its systematic study had been too long
neglected and it was unable to offer effective resistance to the
disciplined enemy.

Although Mediaeval Customary Law was defeated, it put up a good fight
towards the finish. In the same way that scholars set to work to codify
the Canon Law when its position was threatened by the spread of Roman
Law, so the Customary Law found scholars anxious to save it. Many
authoritative treatises on Customary Law now made their appearance. The
most remarkable and influential of these was compiled by Eike von Repgow
on the law of the Saxons. It provided the courts of Saxon Germany with a
firm basis in jurisprudence, which was widely accepted and maintained.
The Northern Territories, armed with this jurisprudence of the
"Sachenspeigel," opposed a stubborn resistance to the encroachments of
Roman Law. Commenting on this fact, Sir Paul Vinogradoff says: "This
proves that the wholesale reception of Roman rules is not to be
accounted for by any inherent incompetence in German Law, since where,
as in Saxon lands, excessive particularism and uncertainty were
counteracted, German Law proved quite able to stand its ground."

This admission from such a high authority on Roman Law is important, and
it becomes doubly important when considered in connection with another
passage, in which he expresses his opinion as to the motives which led
to the reception of Roman Law. "It is evident," he says, "that the
reception of Roman Law depended on political causes: the legal system
was subordinated to the idea of the State towering over individuals and
classes, and free from the intermixture of feudalism. It was bound to
appeal to the minds of all the pioneers of the State conception, to
ambitious Emperors, grasping territorial princes, reforming legists, and
even clerical representatives of law and order. Coming as it did from an
age of highly developed social intercourse, Roman Law satisfied in many
respects the requirements of economic development."In other words, Roman
Law succeeded because it gave support to the individual who pursued his
own private interests without regard to the common-weal, without concern
even whether others were thereby ruined. Hence it was that the
introduction of the Roman Code created unspeakable confusion in every
grade of society. Exactly in proportion as it grew and prevailed,
freedom and liberty went to the wall. The lawyers invested avaricious
and ambitious princes and landlords with legal authority not only to
deprive the peasants of their communal rights, but to evict them from
their life-lease possessions and to increase their taxes. Such immoral
procedure destroyed the feeling of brotherhood in communities and
encouraged enormously the spirit of avarice. The vocation of law
degenerated everywhere into a vulgar moneymaking trade. On every side it
sowed the seeds of discord, and the people lost their confidence in the
sanctity and impartiality of the law.

There is an amusing story of a French lady who, visiting Orleans and
seeing so many law students, exclaimed: "Oh, woe, woe ! In our
neighbourhood there is but one attorney, and he keeps the whole country
in litigation. What mischief will not this horde make."Everywhere the
lawyers excite the indignation of public-spirited men. The charge is
brought against them that they create rights and discover wrongs where
none exist, that they encourage greed in the merchants, that they
disgust men with public life by complicating matters with interminable
formalities and tiresome trifles. Old customs and unwritten laws lose
their force; the lawyers regard as valid nothing that cannot be
sustained by documentary evidence. In a sermon preached in Germany in
1515 we find the following: "When I warn you to beware of usurers and of
those who would plunder you, I also warn you to beware of advocates, who
now prevail. For the last twenty or thirty years they have increased
like poison-weeds and are worse than usurers, for they take away not
only your money but your rights and your honour. They have substituted a
foreign code for the national one, and questions that used to be settled
in two or three days now take as many months and years. What a pity
people cannot get justice as they did before they knew these liars and
deceivers whom no one wanted."

If there be any comfort to be got from this painful story it is that in
the long run the Emperors whose ambitions first let this evil loose upon
the world got nothing out of it for themselves. They were, as much as
the peasantry, a part of the Mediaeval order of society, and the spread
of Roman Law undermined their power as effectively as it destroyed the
prosperity of the peasantry. The system of private warfare which existed
in pre-Christian times had never been abolished within the Empire, but
it had been kept within certain bounds. It was permissible only under
certain circumstances, when authorities refused or had not the power to
interfere. Certain formalities were to be observed. Combatants were not
to attack an enemy before giving him three days notice. Hostilities were
to be suspended on certain days, called "The truce of God." Certain
persons, such as clergymen, pilgrims, labourers, and vine-tenders, and
certain places, such as churches and cemeteries, were to be respected.
But in later times, as a consequence of the corrupting influence of
Roman Law, which spread broadcast the seeds of discord and increased
greed and avarice among the princes, this spirit of chivalry
disappeared, and the mighty availed them selves of every opportunity to
oppress the weak. Every description of violence and outrage went
unpunished, and the Empire was a prey to anarchy and confusion. Hence it
was that for once ecclesiastics and lawyers came together in face of a
common peril, and the doctrine was taught that social salvation could be
found only by the Emperor asserting his ancient authority. Cardinal
Nicholas of Cusa, the great ecclesiastical and secular reformer of the
fifteenth century, voiced the popular sentiment when he blamed the
Emperors for believing that a remedy could be found by gentle means.
"What but ruin," he says, "is to be expected when each one thinks of
himself? If the sovereign hand has lost its power to quell interior
dissensions, avarice and greed will prevail, war and private quarrels
will increase, the dismembered Empire will go to ruin, and what has
unjustly been acquired will be squandered. Let not the princes imagine
that they will long retain what they have plundered from the Empire;
when they have broken all the ties that bind the States, and mangled the
head and the limbs, there must be an end of all authority; there is none
left to whom to turn for help and where there is no order there is
anarchy, there is no more safety for any one. While the princes are
fighting among themselves a class will arise who will know no right but
the force of arms, and as the princes have destroyed the Empire they in
their turn will be destroyed by the rabble. Men will seek for the German
Empire and not find it. Strangers will divide our lands and we shall be
subject to foreign powers."But the Emperor was powerless. His Empire had
been disintegrated by Roman Law.

# Roman Law in England

Passing on from a consideration of the reception of Roman Law in Germany
to a consideration of its influence in England it will be necessary in
the first place to challenge the opinion of the legal profession that
law in this country is English and not Roman.

In the sense in which the legal profession use the word Roman, no doubt
their judgment is well-founded. The legal mind is fond of hair-splitting
technicalities and differences, and without doubt they have their
reasons for believing that English Law differs from Roman Law, though I
have not succeeded in discovering what they are. But any decision in
this matter must depend upon how Roman Law is defined. If emphasis is to
be given to secondary details, then it may be that experts could bring
sufficient evidence to show that English and Roman law are very
different. But if we take our stand upon broad, fundamental
propositions, this is clearly not the case. One does not need to be a
legal expert to understand that English Law to-day is in all its
essentials a law designed to enable rich men to live among poor as
emphatically as Mediaeval Law was designed to enable good men to live
among bad, and that this different moral aim separates it from English
Mediaeval Law as completely as it identifies it with the Roman Code.
English Law to-day may have historical continuity with the Common Law of
the earlier Middle Ages, but in its informing spirit, its broad, basic
principles and framework, there is no denying it is Roman through and
through. The writers of legal textbooks such as Bracton based their
ideas upon Roman Law, and it was always in the minds of lawyers for
guidance and comparison if it was not actually quoted from the bench.
Everywhere English Law, like Roman, exalts private interests at the
expense of communal ones, and in consequence conceives of the State as
an instrument for the maintenance of order rather than the enforcement
of justice. For a law which exalts private interests is essentially an
instrument of anarchy, and maintains order only for the purpose of
putting off the evil day.

In England, as on the Continent, the principles of Roman Law were
imposed from above, and got a footing by appealing to the immediate
self-interest of the monarchy. Henry II saw their value as a means of
increasing his personal power at the expense of his barons, and it was
in his reign that the process which culminated in the highly centralized
monarchy of the Tudors began to make headway. Henry had destroyed the
military independence of the barons by instituting scutage, whereby the
barons agreed to a money payment in lieu of their obligation to provide
him with men-at-arms in time of war. He now set to work with the help of
his legal advisers to undermine their power in their own domains. The
manorial courts of the barons had been partly shorn of their powers by
the judicial reforms of Henry I. Henry II sought to carry this work
further by developing the *curia regis* or Royal Court of Justice. That
court had originally been the court of the king's barons, corresponding
to the court of his tenants, which every feudal lord possessed. From
this central court, Henry sent out justices on circuit, and so brought
the king's law into touch with all parts of the kingdom, breaking open
the enclosed spheres of influence of the manorial courts by emptying
them of their more serious cases, and it may be that at the start these
justices dispensed a law which was cheaper, more expeditious, and more
expert than that of the manor and scarcely different in intention. It
was by such means that the idea was gradually promoted that the king's
law and the king's right took precedence over those of other individuals
and groups, and the people were induced to acquiesce in a change, the
ultimate consequences of which they were unable to foresee.

At first sight these changes have all the appearance of a change in the
right direction. Feudalism rested on local isolation, on the severance
of kingdom from kingdom, and barony from barony, on the distinction of
race and blood, on local military independence, on an allegiance
determined by accidents of birth and social position. It might appear,
therefore, that now, when the circumstances which had created feudalism
were disappearing, when the spread of currency was undermining its
integrity, that the new developments that aimed at breaking down this
isolation, destroyed the military independence of the barons, took the
administration of the law out of the hands of men without a legal
training, and placed it in the hands of experts, who brought order and
uniformity into it, was a change in the right direction. And so it might
have been, had not the justices whose decisions were to leave a lasting
impression on the law of the land been men who despised the common and
traditional law. Their minds had been trained upon Roman Law, and they
set to work to remodel the common law in such a way as to undermine the
basis of Mediaeval institutions and popular liberty. In the long run,
much the same kind of thing happened in England as in Germany, though
the English lawyers were perhaps more subtle in their methods. They did
not advocate a revival of the Justinian Code; perhaps because the
fiction of continuity could not very well be applied in this country,
but they introduced the changes piecemeal. Bracton, the great jurist of
the time, upon whose writings our knowledge of the period is largely
based, sought to accomplish this end by fitting English facts into a
framework of Roman Law.Such is the English Common Law.

The contrast between the old Mediaeval Law and the new Anglicized Roman
Law is most strikingly illustrated by the new legal attitude towards the
question of private property, and in the treatment of the law of
persons. A suspicion gains ground that a consequence of the introduction
of Roman ideas of law was an attempt in the thirteenth century to
transform feudalism into slavery. Nothing was sacred to the lawyers that
could not be supported by documentary evidence. The rights and customs
of the people they looked upon as nominal and revocable. "In Anglo-Saxon
times, the predecessor of the villain, the ceorl, was not a slave at
all, but had a standing against his lord in the court of law."But the
Roman Code made no provision for the rights of different social classes.
It recognized only autocrats and slaves. Hence it was that, when
confronted with Feudalism an institution in which the lords were not
autocrats but functionaries, and the villains not slaves but dependents,
the lawyers were at a loss as to how to apply the Roman rule. They
appear to have vacillated for some time, but "after some contradictory
decisions the court ended by applying strictly the rule that villains
have no claim against their lords and that in law what is held by the
villain is owned by the lord."Bracton follows Azo as to the very
important generalization "all men are born either free or slaves."There
is no getting round these facts. That a decision on this issue had to be
made suggests that, prior to the introduction of Roman ideas of law, the
right of the villain to appeal against his lord was presumed, and that
the courts wavered some time between contradictory opinions, because
things were happening behind the scenes which had to be taken into
consideration, or, in other words, that their final decision was
governed by considerations of political expediency. We saw that, by
means of scutage, the military power of the barons had been destroyed.
The Royal Courts of Justice were now engaged in the task of destroying
their judicial power, and it is not unreasonable to suppose that a time
came when the lords began to ask the question, "Where do we come in?"
under the new order the king and his lawyers were seeking to establish.
It would become daily clearer to the lawyers that if the development of
the Royal Courts of Justice was to continue and to expand, the lords
would have to be brought to terms. If they were to acquiesce in the
change, their status would have to be guaranteed in some new way. And I
suggest that a bargain was struck. The Crown was to be allowed to absorb
the judicial functions, and the lords were to be allowed to enslave
their serfs.

But the change could not stop here. If the lord was to be given absolute
control over his serfs, he must be made absolute owner of the land, for
the spread of currency into rural areas by substituting money payments
for payment in kind was disintegrating the old feudal order. Hence it
came about that the lawyers revived the Roman individualistic theory of
property. The lord was to be acknowledged no longer as a functionary who
held his land conditionally upon the fulfilment of certain specific
duties towards his serfs and tenants, but was to be recognized as the
absolute owner of the land, while, moreover, he was to be given certain
privileges over the common lands. The foundation of the law on this
subject is in the "Statute of Merton" of 1235, which laid down that
lords might "make their profit" of their "wastes, woods and pastures,"
in spite of the complaints of "knights and freeholders" whom they had
"infeoffed of small tenements in their manors," so long as these
feoffees had a sufficient pasture so much as belongeth to their
tenements.\"This was the thin end of the wedge. Like all the law on the
subject, it is delightfully and intentionally vague, in order that the
lawyers might twist and twine its meaning, and the lords bully their
dependents as best suited their ends. The question, of course, arises
how much is "sufficient pasture." This is obviously a matter of opinion,
and as the burden of proof lay upon the tenant, who, if he objected to
enclosures, had to prove that he could not find sufficient pasture, the
statute in effect granted the lords the right to enclose the common
lands to their hearts content, and allowed the peasantry no redress
against injustice, as the courts were in conspiracy against them.

Before the lawyers came along with their Roman Law, Feudalism was a
defensible if not an ideal form of organization. But the lawyers
poisoned the whole system. They became the stewards of the lords and
instructed their noble patrons "in all the legal methods of taming down
the peasants so that they might not shoot up too high." They put them up
to all the little dodges by means of which the common lands might be
enclosed, and how, by attacking things piecemeal, they might encroach
upon the communal rights of the people. They were behind the evictions
which the new commercial lords undertook, in order that tillage might be
turned into pasture, when sheep-farming became so profitable. By such
means funds were secured to feed the ever-increasing taste of the upper
classes for luxury and display, and by such means the unrest was created
which led to the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, when the lawyers got all they
were looking for. Every one of them who fell into the hands of the
rebels was put to death; "not until all these were killed would the land
enjoy its *old freedom* again\" the peasants shouted as they fired the
houses of the stewards and flung the records of the manor courts into
the flames. When they entered London they set ablaze the new inn of the
lawyers at the Temple together with the stately palace of John of Gaunt
and the houses of the foreign merchants, against whom also they had
grievances. Whoever may have had doubts as to the source of the
mischief, the peasants, who were led by the friars, had their minds made
up. It was not a rising against Feudalism as it had existed a couple of
centuries earlier, but a rising against a corrupted Feudalism in general
and the lawyers in particular, whom the peasants rightly believed had
corrupted it as they believed they were corrupting the mind of the young
sovereign. For one object of their rising was to free him from evil
counsellors whom they believed abused his youth.

The Peasants' Revolt is the turning-point in English history, as similar
revolts on the Continent in the latter half of the fourteenth century
are the turning-point in the history of Continental nations. To ascribe
the break-up of Mediaeval society to the economic changes which followed
the Black Death is to draw a smoke-screen across history. It is to
attribute to a general and indefinable cause social phenomena which can
be most explicitly traced to a very definite and particular one, since
the economic confusion which followed the Black Death would not have
come about had not the communal relations which held society together a
couple of centuries earlier been disintegrated by the machinations of
the lawyers. The peasants, therefore, in seeking the destruction of the
lawyers put their finger rightly on the primary cause of the dissolution
of the old Mediaeval order. To this extent their instincts were true.
But unfortunately while they were right as to the cause of the evils
from which they were suffering they were wrong in regard to their
general economic policy. Quite apart from the lawyers, the old feudal
order based upon payment in kind was being disintegrated by the spread
of currency into rural areas which was substituting money payments for
services, and it was urgent, if economic difficulties were not to follow
upon this change, that currency should be regulated in rural areas by
Guilds. But this aspect of the problem they appear to have overlooked
entirely, for instead of demanding charters from their sovereign for
organization of agricultural Guilds along with their demand for the
abolition of serfdom, they demanded liberty to buy and sell. This
mistake was a fatal one, since if they had demanded charters for Guilds
the whole course of English history would have been different. For then
the Guilds would have covered the whole area of production, and as
capitalism would not then have been able to get a foothold, the position
of the Guilds in the towns would not have been undermined in the
sixteenth century by the pressure of the competition of capitalist
industry. After a time such Agricultural Guilds would have been
sufficiently wealthy to buy out the landlords in the same way that the
plutocracy of Rome came to dispossess the landed aristocracy, or they
would have acquired sufficient power to confiscate the lands if this
policy had recommended itself. But this great opportunity of recovering
the land of England for the people was lost because the peasants at the
time saw only their immediate interests. Profiting by a rising market,
they did not under stand the dangers to which an unregulated currency
exposed them. But when at last in the sixteenth century they did become
cognizant of the evil, it was too late. The Guilds in the town had been
defeated and capitalism was already triumphant. It is strange how
history repeats itself. As in Rome we saw that an unregulated currency
gave rise to Roman Law, so in the Middle Ages we see the revival of
Roman Law being accompanied by the spread of an unregulated currency.
There is a definite connection between these two phenomena. The Roman
theory postulating an individualistic society was not only opposed to
all organizations within the State, because in the time of the Republic
such organizations had been used as a basis of conspiracy but to the
maintenance of the Just Price as well, for a right to buy in the
cheapest market and sell in the dearest was admitted in the Justinian
Code. There can therefore be no doubt whatsoever that the influence of
the lawyers would be opposed to the spread of Guild organization in
rural areas.

In spite of the popular feeling against the lawyers which the Peasants
Revolt evinced, the legal profession steadily strengthened its grip on
the government of the country. By the reign of Elizabeth the lawyers had
not only concentrated all judicial functions into their own hands, but
Parliament itself had become an assembly of lawyers. Bacon, though
himself a lawyer, had a great contempt for the profession. No amount of
legal knowledge, he believed, would make a statesman or equip a man to
deal with matters of high policy. "The wisdom of a lawyer," he said, "is
one, that of a lawmaker another. Judges ought to remember that their
office is to interpret law, and not to make law or give law." And so he
viewed with alarm the growing influence of Parliament, as it implied the
growing influence of lawyers. "Without the lawyers," he said, the
country gentlemen would be leaderless.\" He had no objection to
Parliament so long as they did not attempt to control the Government,
but he clearly foresaw the paralysis that would overtake State policy if
ever the lawyers got the upper hand. For though later the Revolution
taught men that lawyers prefer some form of monarchy, it is a nominal or
limited monarchy in which they believe. Their ambition is not to occupy
the throne but to be the power behind the throne, and it is this
ambition that makes them at once so powerful and so irresponsible, which
enables them at once to commit injustice and to visit others with the
consequences.

As against the idea of a sovereign assembly, Bacon exalted the Crown.
The royal prerogative represented in his mind the case of enterprise and
initiative as against pedantry and routine. But monarchy in his day was
beginning to find its position difficult in the new order which it had
been one of the chief means of promoting. Monarchy, as I insisted
earlier, was essentially a Mediaeval institution. The monarchs were the
highest of temporal authorities, but they were subject to the spiritual
authority of the Popes. Monarchs did not care very much about this. They
were restive under it even when they acquiesced. They wanted their rule
to be absolute, and it was this that led them to give support to the
Roman lawyers, who made law depend upon the monarchs will and not
ultimately upon a higher and external authority. After quarrelling with
the Popes for centuries the monarchs succeeded in countries where
Protestantism had triumphed in emancipating themselves from the control
of the Popes. But things did not then work out exactly as they expected.
When the Popes were gone the religious sanction was gone, and monarchs
began to find that instead of contending against the Popes they had to
contend against their own peoples, who now began to question their
authority. Hence the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings by which
James I sought to rehabilitate monarchy. He wrote two treatises on the
subject in which he expounded his views. In one of these, *A King's Duty
in his Office*, he distinguished the lawful ruler from the tyrant by the
fact that the former feels responsibility towards God, while the latter
does not. Hence the lawful ruler claims unconditional obedience from his
subjects and was answerable to God alone, but the people owe no
allegiance to the tyrant. But in the other one, *Basilicon Doron*, which
was prepared for his eldest son Henry and was not written for
publication, he maintains that a king was to be obeyed whether he ruled
justly or unjustly. In the first place because in abolishing monarchy
the State, instead of relieving, would double its distress, for a king
can never be so monstrously vicious that he will not generally favour
justice and maintain order; and in the next, because a wicked king is
sent by God as a plague on people's sins, and it is unlawful to shake
off the burden which God has laid upon them. "Patience, earnest prayer
and amendment of their lives are the only lawful means to move God to
relieve them of that heavy curse."It was essentially the philosophy of
Protestantism and Roman Law which treats all rights as subjective as
opposed to the doctrine of objective rights postulated by Mediaevalism.

So far from settling matters, the system of government by prerogative as
preached and practised by James only made matters worse. It brought him
into collision with the lawyers and the Puritans, who shattered the
power of the Stuarts. The opposition which James had to face came from
the lawyers, and particularly from Edward Coke, who was their leader. He
had served successively under Elizabeth as Speaker and Attorney-General,
and in these positions he appeared mainly as a defender of the Crown
against the dangers of conspiracy. But on being appointed Chief Justice
of Common Pleas his attitude towards the king changed, and he now began
to play the role of champion of the courts against the encroachments of
the king. He was the greatest legal scholar of his age, and being a
conservative by temperament, he came to exalt the common law above king
and Parliament. It was the sovereign, and supreme over both of them. His
position was altogether too paradoxical to become a constitutional
theory, for the rule of the law, according to his interpretation, would
mean not merely the rule of the lawyers but finally the rule of the
pedant and antiquarian. To Coke, law was an end in itself, and he
believed just as much in the Divine Right of Law as James believed in
the Divine Right of Kings, and so a collision became inevitable. Through
the patronage of kings, the Roman lawyers had been gradually raised to
positions of highest authority in the land. Now the time came when the
law, which was mainly their own creation, was to be used as a weapon
with which to challenge the royal authority.

Though Coke's idea of the sovereignty of law as an esoteric science
interpreted by professional jurists died with its author, it is
customary to regard him as one of the founders of constitutional
government. The contest between King and Parliament continued for nearly
a century and was only finally brought to an end by deposing the last of
the Stuarts, which was followed by the enactment of the Bill of Rights
passed in 1689 which put .an end for ever in England to all claim to
Divine Right or hereditary right independent of the law. It was, among
other things, a great victory for the lawyers. Henceforth an English
monarch became just as much the creature of an Act of Parliament as any
member of the Civil Service. Parliament also secured absolute control
over taxation and the Army, which incidentally owed its existence as a
permanent institution to the fact that after the Revolution the Army of
Cromwell refused to be disbanded, regarding itself as the defender of
the liberties of the people against landlords, royalists and Catholics.
With Parliament supreme the triumph of the lawyers was assured. Little
by little, as their ally, Capitalism, whom they had succeeded in
emancipating from the "fetters of the Middle Ages," undermined in the
economic world what was left of the old social order, the control of
government passed into their hands until, in our day, they are supreme.
But what kind of government is it?

>  Parliaments built of paper
>
> And the soft swords of gold,
>
> That twist like a waxen taper
>
> In the weak aggressor's hold.

Such is Mr. Chesterton's description of a government of lawyers.
Experience is teaching us that Bacon was right in holding that no amount
of legal knowledge will equip a man for the high policy of State. Roman
Law, being divorced from morals, tends to corrupt the minds, where it
does not corrupt the morals of those who study it. And it comes about
this way: without a base in morality, law inevitably becomes
increasingly complicated, for its framework can only be maintained amid
such circumstances by defining precisely every detail. Instead,
therefore, of the mind of the student being directed towards a
comprehension of the broad, basic facts of life, it is directed towards
the study of subtle controversies and hair-splitting differences which
befog the intelligence. As success in the legal profession follows
preoccupation with such trivialities, a government composed of lawyers
is necessarily a weak government that waits upon events because it is
incapable of decision on vital issues. But while on the one hand Roman
Law reduces its devotees to impotence so far as constructive
statesmanship is concerned, on the other the very complexity of the law
paralyses the efforts of men without legal training to secure reform.
Hence it is, while parties have changed and battles have been fought
over burning political issues, nothing can get done. And because reform
becomes impossible, anarchy grows apace, which in turn encourages the
growth of legalism in vain attempts to put a boundary to the growth of
disorder. It is thus the modern world has entered a vicious circle in
which anarchy begets legalism and legalism begets anarchy and from which
there can be no escape so long as the principles of Roman Law remain
unchallenged.

Considering the iniquity that has been associated with Roman Law almost
from the days of its revival, it is extraordinary that it should still
command respect. But what is more extraordinary still is that while it
succeeded in corrupting Mediaeval society it has not only succeeded in
escaping censure itself, but has managed to transfer the odium which
belongs to itself to the institutions which it was the means of
corrupting. The Church, the Monarchy, Feudalism and the Guilds each in
turn suffered at its hands. Each and all of them in turn have been
condemned as intolerable tyrannies because each of them in some measure
stood for the communal idea of society, and as such at different times
have offered resistance to the growth of a system of law whose aim it
has been to dissolve all personal and human ties and to replace them by
the impersonal activity of the State. If Capitalism to-day is our active
enemy, let us clearly recognize that Roman Law is the power behind the
throne.

# The Conspiracy Against Mediaevalism

An appreciation of the part which Roman Law played in the corruption of
Mediaeval society and in the creation of modern thought and civilization
should go a long way towards the removal of the prejudice which prevails
to-day against most things Mediaeval, and which distorts out of its
proper perspective everything which then existed. This prejudice has
many roots, and therefore it becomes necessary, ere proceeding with our
story, to seek the removal of the prejudice by explaining its origin. I
hope to show that though to-day this prejudice may be little more than a
misunderstanding, it did not begin as such, but as a conspiracy.

We need not go far to find evidence in support of this contention.
Consider, for one moment, the utterly irresponsible way in which the
word Mediaeval is thrown about in the daily Press. Among a certain class
of writers it is the custom to designate as Mediaeval anything which
they do not understand or of which they do not approve, quite regardless
of the issue as to whether it actually existed in the Middle Ages or
not. During the war, for instance, how often did we read of Mediaeval
Junkerdom, notwithstanding the fact that the Middle Ages was the age of
chivalry, and that, as a matter of fact, the spirit of German militarism
approximates very nearly to that of the military capitalism of Ancient
Rome. For the Romans, like the Germans, did not hesitate to destroy the
towns and industries of their rivals. It was, as I have already pointed
out, for commercial reasons that they burnt Carthage and Corinth, and
caused the vineyards and olive-groves of Gaul to be destroyed, in order
to avoid a damaging competition with the rich Roman landlords. Or,
again, when anything goes wrong in a government department, for reasons
not apparent on the surface, the shortcoming will be described as
Mediaeval regardless of the fact that bureaucracy is a peculiarly Roman
institution and scarcely existed in the Middle Ages. There is no need to
multiply instances, as they are to be met with in the Press daily. But
the result is tragic. An all-pervading prejudice is created, which
militates against clear thinking on social and political questions, for
a prejudice against Mediaevalism is a prejudice against all normal forms
of social organization; it is a prejudice which may spell Bolshevism in
the days to come; for, after all, Bolshevism is itself nothing more than
modern prejudices and historical falsehoods carried to their logical
conclusions.

Now, it stands to reason that this gross solecism is not without a
cause. Nobody on the Press ever speaks of Rome or Greece in this
irresponsible way, and the question needs to be answered: Why is the
Middle Ages the only period in history singled out for such thoughtless
misrepresentation? The answer is, that at one time this indiscriminate
mud-slinging had a motive behind it---a motive, however, that has since
disappeared. Cobbett, I think, got at the bottom of it when, a hundred
years ago, he pointed out that Protestant historians had wilfully
misrepresented the Middle Ages because there were so many people living
on the plunder of the monasteries and the Guilds, and consequently
interested in maintaining a prejudice against the Middle Ages, as the
easiest way of covering their tracks. It was not for nothing that
Cobbett's *History of the Reformation*was burnt by the public hangman.
It was burnt because it was more than a history---because it exposed a
conspiracy. But the prejudice exists; it has other roots which require
to be attacked.

We need not pause to consider how the prejudices of freethinkers have
militated against an understanding of the Middle Ages, as the free
thinking of freethinkers is no longer above suspicion. In so far as
their prejudices are in these days a force to be reckoned with, it is as
a part of the Marxian or Bolshevik gospel. The rise to popularity of the
Marxian creed has given the anti-Mediaeval prejudice a new lease of
life, by refusing in the first place to admit that any but material
forces have ever played more than a secondary part in the shaping of
history, and what naturally follows from it, distorting or ignoring such
facts as do not happen to fit in with the materialist conception. How
gross are the prejudices which have been impressed upon the minds of the
workers may be understood by any one who will take the trouble to read
such a book as that produced by one of the Neo-Marxians, *A Worker Looks
at History*, by Mr. Mark Starr. It is an important book because of the
wide circulation it has amongst the workers. Popular misconceptions and
prejudices are exaggerated. In the chapter entitled "The Renaissance
from the Mediaeval Night" the author, after referring to the schools of
Alexandria, says: "Christianity proscribed philosophy, abolished the
schools, and plunged the world into an abyss of darkness from which it
only emerged after twelve hundred years." Mr. Starr is indignant at
this. But it never occurs to him to enquire what these schools taught;
and this is important. He assumes that they taught what he admires in
the Pagan philosophers, for whom I have as much regard as has Mr. Starr.
But these schools of the Neo-Platonists were degenerate institutions.
They taught everything that Mr. Starr would hate. Their teaching was
eclectic---a blending of Christian and Platonic ideas with Oriental
mysticism. They believed in magic. Their reasoning was audacious
andMarxistenious, but it was intellectual slush without any definite
form or structure. Above all, it encouraged a detachment from the
practical affairs of life, and thus became an obstruction to real
enlightenment. It was well that these schools were suppressed; they
needed suppressing, for no good can come of such misdirection of
intellectual activities, and I doubt not had Mr. Starr been then alive
he would have risen in his wrath against their unreality. The Early
Church was opposed to these degenerate intellectuals, because, while the
Church desired to establish the Kingdom of God upon Earth, they were
content for it to remain in heaven. But Mr. Starr has been so prejudiced
against Mediaevalism that he attributes to the Church all the vices
which it sought to suppress.

Though the Early Church closed the schools of the Neo-Platonists, it did
not suppress philosophy. On the contrary, Greek culture was preserved at
Constantinople, while much of Greek philosophy was absorbed in Christian
theology. Before the close of the New Testament Canon, Greek philosophy
had begun to colour the expression of Christian doctrine; in the hands
of the Fathers of the Church it entered into its very substance. The
logos of Plato reappears as the doctrine of the Trinity, which,
incidentally, is not an explanation of the universe, but "a fence to
guard a mystery."It reappears, however, not as an intellectual
abstraction, but as a concrete reality, and, as such, possesses a
dynamic power capable of changing the world. It was this burning desire
to change the world which made the Early Christians so impatient with
the Neo-Platonists, who made speculation an excuse for inaction, as it
makes the Neo-Marxians to-day rightly impatient with a certain type of
Socialist intellectual. Moreover, it was this insistence upon practical
activity which made Christianity so dogmatic in its theology. Marxians
at any rate ought to realize that strenuous activity must rest upon
dogmas. On the other hand, the weakness of Pagan philosophy was that it
was powerless to influence life. "Cicero, the well-paid advocate of the
publicani and bankers, whom he frequently calls in the most idyllic
style *ornamentum civitatis*, *firmamentum rei publics flos equitum*
while philosophizing on virtue, despoiled with violence the inhabitants
of the province he administered, realizing, *salvis legibus*, two
million two hundred thousand sestercia in less than two months. Honest
Brutus invested his capital at Cyprus at 48%; Verres in Sicily at 24%.
Much later, when the economic dissolution of the Republic had led to the
establishing of the Empire, Seneca, who, in his philosophical writings,
preached contempt of riches, despoiled Britain by his usury.\"

While the prejudice against Mediaevalism doubtless had its origin in
malice and forethought, it is encouraged by the fallacious division of
Mediaeval history into the Middle Ages and the Dark Ages. By means of
this artificial and arbitrary division the popular mind has been led to
suppose that mankind was plunged into darkness and ignorance after the
decline of Roman civilization, while it is generally inferred that this
was due to the spread of Christianity, which it is supposed exhibited a
spirit hostile to learning and enlightenment rather than to the inroads
of the barbarian tribes. A grosser travesty of historic truth was never
perpetrated. But the travesty is made plausible by the custom which many
historians have of detailing the history of a particular geographical
area, instead of making history continuous with the traditions of
thought and action, the geographical centres of which change from time
to time. Treating the history of Western Europe according to the former
method, the period of Roman occupation is followed by one of barbarism,
in which almost every trace of civilization disappears for a time, and
no doubt the people who dwelt in this part of Europe did live through a
period of darkness. That, however, was the case with the Western Empire
only. The Eastern Empire was never overrun by the barbarians. On the
contrary, its capital, Constantinople, maintained during all this period
a high state of civilization, and was the artistic and cultural centre
of the world. While the barbarian hordes were overrunning the Western
Empire, the Eastern Church preserved the traditions of Greek culture,
which, as order became restored in the West, gradually filtered through
Venice until the fall of Constantinople in 1453. The subsequent
emigration of Greek scholars and artists to Italy removed the last
barrier between the culture of Eastern and Western Europe.

It was at Constantinople, during the sixth century, that the Code of
Justinian was made. It is painful for me to have to record this fact,
seeing that it led, unfortunately, to the revival of Roman Law, and it
is mentioned here not as a recommendation, but merely as testimony to
the existence of intellectual activity during the so-called Dark Ages.
The task of extracting a code from the six camel-loads of law-book
certainly testifies to the existence of learning. Moreover, it was
during this period that the Byzantine school of architecture flourished.
The reputation of the cathedral church of Santa Sophia, built in the
sixth century, was so great that the twelfth-century William of
Malmesbury knew of it "as surpassing every other edifice in the world."
Of this architecture Professor Lethaby writes:--

"The debt of universal architecture to the early Christian and Byzantine
schools of builders is very great. They evolved the church types; they
carried far the exploration of domical construction, and made wonderful
balanced compositions of vaults and domes over complex plans. They
formed the belfry from the Pharos and fortification towers. We owe to
them the idea of the vaulted basilican church, which, spreading westward
over Europe, made our great vaulted cathedrals possible. They entirely
recast the secondary forms of architecture; the column was taught to
carry the arch, the capital was reconsidered as a bearing block and
became a feature of extraordinary beauty. The art of building was made
free from formulae, and architecture became an adventure in building
once more. We owe to them a new type of moulding, the germ of the Gothic
system, by the introduction of the roll-moulding and their application
of it to strings and the margins of doors. The first arch known to me
which has a series of roll-mouldings is in the palace of Mshatta. The
tendency to cast windows into groups, the ultimate source of tracery and
the foiling of arches is to be mentioned. We owe to these Christian
artists the introduction of delightfully fresh ornamentation, crisp
foliage, and interlaces, and the whole scheme of Christian iconography."

This is no small achievement. Only an age as indifferent to the claims
of architecture as our own could underrate its magnitude. To the average
historian, however, this period of history is a blank, because he lacks
the kind of knowledge and sympathy necessary to assess its achievements
at their proper value. To his mind, enlightenment and criticism are
synonymous; and, finding no criticism, he assumes there was no
enlightenment, not understanding that criticism is the mark of
reflective rather than of creative epochs. For, though at times they
appear contemporaneously, they have different roots, and the critical
spirit soon destroys the creative, as we shall see when we come to
consider the Renaissance. How false such standards of judgment are may
be understood by comparing the Dark Ages with our own. In those days
there was plenty of architecture, but little, if any, architectural
literature. To-day the volume of architectural literature and criticism
is prodigious, but there is precious little architecture.

While the traditions of culture all through this period were preserved
and developed in the Eastern Church with its centre at Constantinople,
the task which fell to the Western, or Roman, Church was of as different
order. Upon it was thrust the task of civilizing the barbarian races of
the West which had overthrown the Roman Empire, and it is to the credit
of the Early Church that it succeeded where the Romans had failed.
Success was achieved through different methods. Roman civilization had
been imposed by violence and maintained by compulsion: it was always an
exotic affair, and it fell to pieces when the force of the barbarians
became at last more powerful than that of the Roman Empire. The success
of Christianity is attributable to the fact that it effected a change in
the spirit of the peoples. This great achievement was the work of the
early Monastic Orders, whose missionary zeal was destined to spread
Christianity throughout Europe.

The early Christian monks had been characterized by a decided Oriental
tendency to self-contemplation and abstraction, and in their missionary
enterprises their inter course with the rude populations was limited to
instructing them in the homilies and creeds of Christ. Augustine and his
forty companions, who were sent forth by Gregory the Great to convert
Britain (A.D. 596), "acted on a very different principle, for in
addition to the orthodox weapons of attack and persuasion which they
employed against their opponents, they made use of other, but equally
powerful, methods of subjugation, by teaching the people many useful
arts that were alike beneficial to their bodies and their minds. As soon
as they settled in Kent, and had begun to spread themselves towards the
north and west, they built barns and sheds for their cattle side by side
with their newly erected churches, and opened schools in the immediate
neighbourhood of the house of God, where the youth of the nominally
converted population were now for the first time instructed in reading,
and in the formulae of their faith and where those who were intended for
a monastic life or for the priesthood, received the more advanced
instruction necessary to their earnest calling."

We read that the Benedictines of Abingdon, in Berkshire, were required
by their canonized founder to perform a daily portion of field labour,
in addition to the prescribed services of the Church. \" In their mode
of cultivating the soil they followed the practices adopted in the
warmer and more systematically tilled lands of the south. They soon
engaged the services of the natives in the vicinity and repaid their
labours with a portion of the fruits of their toil, and in proportion as
the woods and thickets were cleared, and the swamps and morasses
disappeared, the soil yielded a more plentiful return; while the land,
being leased or sub-let, became the means of placing the monastery,
which was, in fact, the central point of the entire system, in the
position of a rich proprietor. From such centres as these the beams of a
new and hopeful life radiated in every direction.\"

"The requirements of the monks, and the instruction they were able to
impart around them, soon led to the establishment in their immediate
neighbourhood of the first settlement of artificers and retail dealers,
while the excess of their crops, flocks and herds, gave rise to the
first markets, which were, as a rule, originally held before the gate of
the abbey church. Thus hamlets and towns were formed, which became the
centres of trade and general intercourse, and thus originated the market
tolls, and the jurisdiction of these spiritual lords. The beneficial
influences of the English monasteries in all departments of education
and mental culture expanded still further, even in the early times of
the Anglo-Saxons, for they had already then become conspicuous for the
proficiency which many of their members had attained in painting and
music, sculpture and architecture. The study of the sciences, which had
been greatly advanced through the exertions of Bede, was the means of
introducing one of his most celebrated followers, Alcuin of York, to the
court of Charlemagne, for the purpose of establishing schools and
learning in the German Empire. And although every monastery did not
contribute in an equal degree to all these beneficial results, all aided
to the best of their power and opportunities in bringing about that
special state of cultivation which characterised the Middle Ages."

So much for the Dark Ages and the malicious libel which insinuates that
the Mediaeval world was opposed to learning. So far from such
insinuations being true, every Monastic Order, for whatever purpose
originally founded, ended in becoming a learned order. It was the
recognition of this fact that led St. Francis, who was a genuinely
practical man, to insist that his followers should not become learned or
seek their pleasures in books, "for I am afraid," he says, "that the
doctors will be the destruction of my vineyard." And here is found the
paradox of the situation: so long as learning was in the hands of men
who valued it as such it made little headway, but when at length the new
impulse did come, it came in no small measure from the Franciscans, from
the men who had the courage to renounce learning and to lead a life of
poverty, for in the course of time the Franciscans became learned, as
had done the other orders. Thus we see that the central idea of
Christianity---to renounce the world in order to conquer it---bears
fruit not only in the moral but in the intellectual universe.

Sufficient has now been said to refute the charge that the Mediaeval
Church was opposed to learning. The case of the Franciscans in decrying
learning is the only one known to me, and their action, as we shall see
in a later chapter, turned out to be a blessing in disguise. What the
Mediaeval Church was against was heresy, which was often associated with
learning, but the suppression of heresy is a thing fundamentally
different from opposition to learning, and there is nothing peculiarly
Mediaeval about it. The Greeks condemned Socrates to death for seeking
to discredit the gods, while Plato himself came finally to the
conclusion that in his ideal State to doubt the gods would be punishable
by death. The Roman Emperors persecuted the Christians for refusing
observance to the gods, Marcus Aurelius himself being no exception to
this rule, while we ourselves show equal readiness to persecute heresy
against the State, as in the case of the pacifist conscientious
objectors. And so it will always be when great issues are at stake. A
people with a firm grip on fundamental truth attacks heresy at its roots
in ideas. A people like ourselves, that has lost its grip on primary
truth, waits until it begins to influence action, but once the heresy is
recognized, all peoples in all times have sought its suppression.

Before going further, let us be clear in our minds as to what we mean by
heresy. At different times it has meant different things, but, in
general, it might be defined as the advocacy of ideas which, at a given
time in a given place, are considered by those in power as subversive to
the social order, and the instinct of self-preservation has impelled all
peoples in all times to suppress such ideas. In the Mediaeval period
such persecutions were associated with religion, because in that era all
ideas, social and political, were discussed under a theological aspect.
The position is simple. If it be affirmed that every social system rests
finally upon the common acceptance of certain beliefs, any attempt to
alter beliefs will tend, therefore, in due course to affect the social
system. Plato carried this idea much farther than the question of
religious beliefs. In the *Republic* he says: "The introduction of a new
style of music must be shunned as imperilling the whole State; since
styles of music are never disturbed without affecting the most important
political institutions." "The new style," he continues, "gradually
gaining a lodgement, quietly insinuates itself into manners and customs;
and from these it issues in greater force, and makes its way into mutual
compacts; and from making com pacts it goes on to attack laws and
constitutions, displaying the utmost impudence until it ends by
overturning everything, both in public and in private." Plato here
recognizes that if communal relations in society are to be maintained
and men are to share common life, it can be only on the assumption that
they share common ideas and tastes. From this it follows that the nearer
a society approaches the communal ideal the more it will insist upon
unity of faith, because the more conscious it will be of ideas that are
subversive of the social order.

The heretic was the man who challenged this community of beliefs, and it
was for this reason that he was looked upon as a traitor to society. In
the Middle Ages a man was not originally interfered with because he held
unorthodox views. He was interfered with because he sought by every
means in his power to spread such views among the people, and he met
with much stronger opposition from the public themselves than from
ecclesiastic authority. The ideas for which the heretics were persecuted
were individualist notions disguised in a communist form. The heretics
had no "sense of the large proportion of things." They were not
catholic-minded in the widest meaning of the term. They had no sense of
reality, and if they had been allowed to have their own way they would
have precipitated social chaos by preaching impossible ideals.

The position will be better understood if we translate the problem into
the terms of the present day. Suppose the Socialists succeeded in
abolishing capitalism and established their ideal State, and then
suppose a man came along preaching individualist ideas, attempting to
bring back capitalism in some underhand way by the popularization of a
theory the implications of which the average man did not understand. At
first, I imagine, he would not be interfered with. If he began to make
converts, however, a time would come when Socialists would either have
to consent to the overthrow of their society in the interests of
capitalism or take measures against him. If ever they were faced with
this dilemma there can be little doubt how they would act. The
Mediaevalist attitude towards the heretic was precisely what the
Socialist attitude would be towards such a man. The controversies over
the Manichean, Arian, and Nestorian heresies raged for centuries, and no
action was taken against them until it became clear what were the issues
involved, when the Church, through its Councils, made definite
pronouncements and the heresies were suppressed. They were suppressed
because men had instinctively come to feel that they imperilled not only
the unity of the Faith but the unity of the social order as well.

Historical evidence suggests that this is the right avenue of approach,
since the persecution of heretics began with secular and not with
ecclesiastical authority. During the first three centuries of the Early
Church there was no persecution of heretics. All the influential
ecclesiastics then agreed that the civil arm might be employed to deal
with them, by prohibiting assemblies and in other ways preventing them
from spreading their views, but that the death penalty was contrary to
the spirit of the Gospel. For centuries such was the ecclesiastical
attitude, in both theory and practice. This attitude did not recommend
itself to the successors of Constantine, however, who, continuing in the
persuasion of the Roman Emperors that the first concern of the imperial
authority was the protection of religion, persecuted men for not being
Christians, in the same spirit that their predecessors had persecuted
men because they were Christians. At a later date---somewhere about the
year 1000---when Manicheans expelled from Bulgaria spread themselves
over Italy, Spain, France, and Germany, the people, thinking that the
clergy were supine in the suppression of heresy, took the law into their
own hands and publicly burnt the heretics. Thus it is recorded that in
1114, when the Bishop of Soissons, who had sundry heretics in durance in
his episcopal city, went to Beauvais to ask advice of the bishops
assembled there for a synod, the "believing folk," fearing the habitual
soft-heartedness of the ecclesiastics, stormed the prison, took the
accused out of the town and burnt them. Such incidents, which suggest
the Lynch law of America, were not uncommon in the early Middle Ages,
when the persecution of heretics was due to the fanatical outbursts of
an over-zealous populace or to the arbitrary action of individual
rulers, but never to ecclesiastical authority.

It was not until the latter half of the twelfth century that the
attitude of the Church changed, owing to the rise of the Catharists,
better known to history as the Albigenses, so called from the town of
Albi (in South-west France), where a council was held against them. The
Albigenses taught a creed that carried the Manichean heresy to its
logical and evil with spirit and matter. According to them, spirit was
good and matter was evil. Hence their contempt of the body, and hence,
too, the Christian dogma of the Resurrection of the Body, whereby it was
sought to combat the evils consequent upon such a perverted attitude
towards life by affirming "that in any final consummation the bodily
life of man must find a place no less than the spiritual."\[\^8\] The
Manichean heresy had been taught by the Gnostic sects in the early days
of Christianity. It had been suppressed but had reappeared again from
time to time in its old form. Now, however, it was to receive a new
development. If spirit were good and matter evil, if the bodily life of
man on earth were to be regarded as a form of penance to which man was
condemned because of evil deeds in former lives, then the sooner he
could by self-effacement and rigid discipline pay the penalty of his
misdeeds (that is, to work off the bad karma, as Theosophists would say)
the better it would be for him. Hence it was that the ascetic rigorists
among the Albigenses preached a doctrine which was tantamount to the
advocacy of suicide---they sought to escape this life by slow
starvation. Although such extremists were at all times few in number,
they were the objects of an adoring reverence from the people, which led
to the rapid spread of such teachings in Germany, France, and Spain.
About the same time, and mixed up with the Albigenses to some extent,
there occurred an outburst of witchcraft, magic, and sorcery---the old
religion, as the Italians call it---and the Church was at last roused to
action. Terribly afraid of this new spirit, which she considered menaced
not only her own existence but the very foundations of society as well,
the Church in the end shrank from no cruelty that she might be rid of it
for ever. The action of the Church was rather the result of panic
produced by suspicions in the minds of normal men than an outburst of
primitive savagery. In the South of France the Albigenses were very
powerful, for not only were they very zealous, but the nobility, for
reasons of their own, supported them, a circumstance which imparted to
the Albigenses the aspect of a powerful political party, in addition to
that of an heretical sect. They were condemned at various Councils,
including the Lateran Council of 1179, but these condemnations merely
increased the opposition of the Albigenses. Pope Innocent III, whose
juristic mind identified heresy with high treason, resolved to extirpate
the heresy, and in 1198 he sent two Cistercian monks to try pacific
measures. These failing, he began his serious and deliberate policy of
extermination. He ordered a crusade to be preached against the
Albigenses. Indulgences were promised to all who took part in this holy
war, and soon afterwards Simon de Montfort (father of the founder of the
English parliament) led a crusade which was carried on until ended
politically by the Treaty of Paris in 1229. The Albigenses, as a
political party, were now suppressed, and an Inquisition was left behind
to uproot any sporadic growth of heresy. The Inquisition then
established was a secular and temporary institution. The definite
participation of the Church in the administration of the Inquisition
dates from 1231, when Gregory IX placed it under ecclesiastical control.
Exact information as to the motives which led him to take this action is
lacking, but the hypothesis is advanced by the writer of the article on
the Inquisition in the *Catholic Encyclopedia* that its introduction
might be due to the anxiety of the Pope to forestall the encroachments
of the Emperor Frederick II in the strictly ecclesiastical province of
doctrine. This hypothesis I am disposed to accept, for it makes
intelligible much that would otherwise be obscure, and, if it be
correct, means that the establishment of the Inquisition is finally to
be attributed to the influence of Roman Law.

\[\^8\] Essays in Orthodoxy, by Oliver Chase Quick.

It will be remembered that the Commentators won the favour of the
Emperors by declaring that, as the successors of the Roman Emperors,
their will was law, and that the Hohenstaufen family gladly accepted
this decision as a justification of their desire for absolutism.
Frederick II, following in the footsteps of his father, Frederick
Barbarossa, sought by every means to make his power supreme over Church
and State. Bearing this in mind, it is not unreasonable to suppose that
the rigorous legislation that he enacted against heretics, and which he
unscrupulously made use of to remove any who stood in the path of his
ambitions, was not to be attributed to his affected eagerness for the
purity of the Faith, but because he saw that the power that persecuted
heresy became, *ipso facto*, the final authority in matters of faith,
and that with such a weapon in his hands he would be in a position to
encroach gradually upon the ecclesiastical province of doctrine, so that
finally Church doctrine would come to be as much dependent upon the will
of the Emperor as the Civil Law. It is suggested that Gregory perceived
whither Frederick's policy was leading, and that he resolved to resist
his encroachments in the only way that was open to him. He could not
have prevented the persecution of heretics even had he so desired, for,
as we have seen, their persecution was rooted in popular feeling. What
he could do, however, was, by regularizing the procedure, to prevent
Frederick from abusing his power, and Gregory accordingly instituted a
tribunal of ecclesiastics that would pronounce judgment on the guilt of
those accused of heresy. This action was immediately of service to the
heretics, for the regular procedure thus introduced did much to abrogate
the arbitrariness, passion, and injustice of the civil courts of the
Emperor.

The Church, then, undertook the task of deciding who was and who was not
a heretic, and this was as far as interference went. What was to be done
with one found guilty of heresy was, as heretofore, left to the civil
authorities to decide. Torture had been used in civil courts as a means
of extracting evidence, but its use was for long prohibited in the
ecclesiastical courts. Its introduction into the latter was due to Pope
Clement V, who formulated regulations for its use, but it was to be
resorted to only under very exceptional circumstances. Why the Pope
should have been led to make this decision---what especial factors
should have impelled him to take a step so fatal---is not evident, but
we do know that torture was most cruelly used when the Inquisitors were
exposed to the pressure of civil authorities, and that in Spain, where
the Inquisitors were appointed by the Crown, the Inquisition, under the
presidency of Torquemada (1482-94) distinguished itself by its startling
and revolting cruelty. Here again, however, as in the case of the
Emperor Frederick II, it was used as an instrument to further the
political ambitions of the Kings of Spain, who profited by the
confiscation of the property of the heretics, which was not
inconsiderable, remembering that several hundred thousand Jews at this
time quitted Spain to avoid persecution. Pope Sixtus IV made several
attempts to stop the deadly work, but was obliged through pressure from
Spain to deny the right of appeal to himself. The situation had then got
quite out of hand. The persecution of heretics ceased to be a popular
movement, and became generally detested. Its cruel punishments, secret
proceedings, and prying methods caused universal alarm, and led not only
to uprisings of the people against a tyranny which was regarded by many
as "worse than death" but, by investing heretics with the crown of
martyrdom, defeated its own ends and brought orthodox Christianity into
discredit. After the period of the Reformation the Inquisition relaxed
its severity, but it lingered on until it was finally abolished in Spain
in 1835.

The passions that are aroused by the very name of the Inquisition make
it difficult to judge its work, while an impartial history of it has yet
to be written. From its history, as from that of the persecution of
heresy, there clearly emerges the fact that religious persecution was
due in the first place to the initiative of the civil authority, that at
a later date it became a popular movement, and that for centuries the
ecclesiastics resisted the demands of both the civil authorities and the
people for persecution. Furthermore, when the attitude of ecclesiastics
changed it was owing to the heresy of the Catharists, which threatened
at the same time not only the existence of the Church but the very
foundations of society; and that when at last the Papacy did move in the
matter it was because of the danger that worse things might happen if
the persecution of heretics was to continue independent of
ecclesiastical direction. Looking at the dilemma which presented itself
to Gregory IX, it is extremely difficult to say which was the less
momentous of the two evils between which he had to choose---whether he
was to allow ambitious Emperors to persecute heretics as a means of
furthering their Imperial desire to control the Church, or whether, by
regularizing the procedure, the Church might mitigate the evils of lay
prosecution, even though she incurred the odium of tyranny as a
consequence. But of this we may be certain, that the tyranny was not
only foreign to the spirit of Christianity and ecclesiastical authority,
but it was directly attributable to the spread of Roman Law, which,
awakening in the hearts of Emperors and Kings the desire to subordinate
religion to State authority, as had been the case in Rome, awakened also
the Pagan spirit of religious persecution. The contrary hypothesis
generally held, that the religious persecution is due to the intolerance
of ecclesiastical authority, is untenable, not only because the facts of
history flatly contradict it, but because as compulsion is emphatically
an attribute of the State, the ecclesiastical authority is finally
powerless to use it to further its ends apart from the co-operation of
the State. And the best proof I can bring in support of this contention
is that the Church was powerless to suppress Roman Law---the heresy that
laid the foundations of materialism and undermined the position not only
of the Church but of Christianity itself---because it was supported by
the secular authorities.

# Mediaevalism and Science

Everybody nowadays is willing to grant that the Middle Ages was great in
architecture; though I would remind admirers of Gothic that this
appreciation is quite a recent thing. The right to admire Gothic had to
be fought for. Less than a hundred years ago Sir Walter Scott thought it
necessary to apologize to his readers for his love of it. This change of
opinion as to the merits of Gothic is due to the powerful advocacy of
Ruskin and to the activities of the architects of the Gothic Revival. We
are now beginning to realize that the Medievalists knew something about
economics and social organization. But few people realize that not only
was the basis of science laid in the Middle Ages but that its methods
remain Mediaeval to this day, for in this respect science remained
unaffected by the influence of the Renaissance.

That so much ignorance should obtain on this subject is due to the
conspiracy about things Mediaeval which Cobbett was the first to expose.
The popular notion is that during the "long Mediaeval night," when the
Church held sway over men's minds, education was hampered; Papal Bulls
forbade the study of chemistry and practical anatomy, as dissection of
the human body was regarded as an heretical experiment; all reasoning
was deductive, and such experimentalists as there were wasted their time
in the search for the philosopher's stone which was to transmute base
metal into gold, or for the elixir of life; whilst the bulk of the
people were kept in a state of "grovelling ignorance and superstition."
All advance was made by scholars who were persecuted by the Church in
order to keep the people in subjection to its tyranny, and the results
of their labours have enabled science to confer untold benefits upon
civilization. But I will not press this latter point. Poison gas, liquid
fire, and bombs from aeroplanes, have brought a doubt into many minds as
to the truly beneficial intentions of science, and there are many in
these days who incline to the view that the "Mediaeval prejudice," so
called, was not altogether unjustified after all.

In these circumstances it is somewhat distressing to find that the
Medievalists had no such prejudice. It is possible they might have had,
could they have clearly foreseen all the horrors which science has let
loose upon the world. But they were not sufficiently far-sighted, and as
a matter of fact they applied themselves to the study of science with
great avidity. It will clear the air if we begin by bringing evidence to
refute these popularly accepted notions. The supposed Papal decree
forbidding the study of chemistry turns out on examination to be nothing
of the kind. The decretal of John XXII (1316-34) did not aim at the
chemist, but at the abuse of chemistry by the alchemist, who incident
ally was not the fool he is popularly imagined to be, but a trickster
who cast counterfeit money and a fraudulent company promoter who got
money out of people by getting them to subscribe to schemes for
extracting gold from sea-water,and it was on this account that he was
condemned. Legitimate science, as we shall see later, was encouraged and
subsidized by the Popes. Meanwhile it may be observed that while the
Mediaevalists distinguished between chemistry and alchemy, no such
distinction obtains to-day. Our alchemists do not waste their time in
attempting to make gold out of silver; they have found a much more
profitable business in making wool out of cotton, silk out of wood, and
leather out of paper; while these abuses are not in these days forbidden
by Papal Bulls but are taught and encouraged at our technical
universities.

Now let us turn to the supposed prohibition of dissection which it is
popularly taught was regarded as an heretical experiment because it came
into collision with the Christian dogma of the Resurrection of the Body.
There may, of course, have been ignorant people who objected to it on
this score, but such an objection could not have been advanced
officially because, as we saw in the last chapter, the dogma does not
relate to our existing physical bodies but to the fact "that in any
final consummation the bodily life of man must find a place no less than
the spiritual." Such being the case, it is not surprising to find that
in the Middle Ages no objection was made officially to dissection on
religious grounds. The Bull promulgated by Boniface VIII which has so
often been interpreted as forbidding dissection had another purpose. Its
aim was to stop a barbarous custom which had grown up of boiling the
corpses of distinguished people who had died in foreign lands in order
to remove the flesh before sending the bones home to be buried. Bene
dict XIV on being asked as to whether this Bull forbade dissection
replied as follows:--

"By the singular beneficence of God the study of medicine flourished in
a very wonderful manner in this city (Rome). Its professors are known
for their supreme talents to the remotest parts of the earth. There is
no doubt that they have greatly benefited by the diligent labour which
they have devoted to dissection. From this practice beyond doubt they
have gained a profound knowledge of their art and a proficiency that has
enabled them to give advice for the benefit of the ailing as well as a
skill in the curing of disease. Now such dissection of bodies is in no
way contrary to the Bull of Pope Boniface. He indeed imposed the penalty
of excommunication, to be remitted only by the Sovereign Pontiff
himself, upon all those who would dare to disembowel the body of any
dead person and either dismember it or horribly cut it up, separating
the flesh from the bones. From the rest of this Bull, however, it is
clear that this penalty was only to be inflicted upon those who took
bodies already buried out of their graves, and, by an act horrible in
itself, cut them in pieces in order that they might carry them elsewhere
and place them in another tomb. It is very clear, however, that by this,
the dissection of bodies, which has proved so necessary for those
exercising the profession of medicine is by no means forbidden."This
reply of the Pope's ought to settle the question, but if further
corroboration is needed it may be mentioned that at this time dissection
was carried on in all the important cities in Italy, at Verona, Pisa,
Naples, Bologna, Florence, Padua, Venice, and at the Papal Medical
School at Rome.

Let us now pass on to consider the introduction of science into Europe
by the Saracens. As a plain statement of fact, Europe in the Middle Ages
did get science from the Saracens. This is perfectly true. But the
deduction it is usual to make from this fact---namely, that the lower
state of Western European civilization at that time was due to the
prejudice against science of the Mediaeval mind under the influence of
Christianity---is most demonstrably false. The difference between the
two levels of civilization is to be accounted for by the simple fact
that whereas the Saracens established their Empire over communities
already civilized in which the traditions of Roman civilization
survived, the Mediaeval Church had the much more difficult task of
rebuilding Western civilization from its very foundations after it had
been entirely destroyed by the barbarians. Naturally this, in its early
stages, was a much slower process. Bearing in mind these circumstances,
there is nothing remarkable in the fact that the Saracens knew of
Aristotle and the sciences at a time when Western Europeans did not. But
that the Medievalists accepted them from the Saracens is surely evidence
of an open-mindedness which did not disdain to learn from a heterodox
enemy, rather than of an incurable prejudice against all new kinds of
knowledge. How unsubstantial is this charge against the influence of
Christianity becomes apparent when the question is asked, Whence did the
Saracens get their knowledge of Aristotle and the sciences? They could
not have got it direct from the Greeks, for Mahomet was not born until
the year A.D. 571, and as Christianity had established itself at least
two centuries before in the communities around and east of the
Mediterranean basin, apart from other evidence it would be a reasonable
speculation to assume that they got their knowledge from some Christian
source. But it so happens that this is not a matter of speculation but
of ascertained historical fact, the Christian sect of Nestorians having
been the connecting link by which Greek science and philosophy were
transmitted from the conquered to the conquerors, and it came about this
way:

"When the Caliphate was usurped by the Umayyad, the fugitive Abbasid
princes, Abbas and Ali, sojourned among the Nestorians of Arabia,
Mesopotamia and Western Persia and from them acquired a knowledge and a
love of Greek Science and philosophy. Upon the accession of the Abbasid
dynasty to the Caliphate in A.D. 750, learned Nestorians were summoned
to court. By them Greek books were translated into Arabic from the
original or from Syriac translations and the foundations laid of Arabic
science and philosophy. In the ninth century the school of Bagdad began
to flourish, just when the schools of Christendom were falling into
decay in the West and into decrepitude in the East. The newly awakened
Moslem intellect busied itself at first chiefly with mathematics and
medical science; afterwards Aristotle threw his spell over it and an
immense system of orientalized Aristotelianism was the result. From the
East Moslem learning was carried into Spain; and from Spain Aristotle
re-entered Northern Europe once more and revolutionized the intellectual
life of Christendom far more completely than he had revolutionized the
intellectual life of Islam.

"During the course of the twelfth century a struggle had been going on
in the bosom of Islam between the philosophers and the theologians. It
was just at the moment when, through the favour of the Caliph Al-Mansur,
the theologians had succeeded in crushing the philosophers that the
torch of Aristotelian thought was handed on to Christendom. The history
of Arabic philosophy, which had never succeeded in touching the
religious life of the people or leaving a permanent stamp upon the
religion of Mohammed, ends with the death of Averroes in 1198. The
history of Christian Aristotelianism and of the new scholastic theology
which was based upon it begins just when the history of Arabic
Aristotelianism comes abruptly to a close."

Early in the thirteenth century Aristotle made his debut in the
University of Paris. But the translations studied were not taken from
the Greek but from the Arabic. Thus Aristotle arrived in an orientalized
dress and was accompanied by commentators and by independent works of
Arabian philosophers, some of which claimed the sanction of Aristotle's
name. This new learning, which brought with it a whole cargo of
heresies, was associated with the name of Averroes (who incidentally was
persecuted by the Saracens as a heretic during his lifetime and
remembered only as a physician and jurist after his death). "It stirred
the mental powers to recover an earlier and now lost truth sometimes
moving the mind to science, sometimes to strange apocalyptic vision; now
to a conviction that a fresh outpouring of the Spirit was impending, now
to pantheistic denial of all explicit revelation or positive religion,
now to a defiant sectarianism, now to the wild torture of ascetic
individualism."Whatever the form, all were animated by a genuine
hostility to the powers that were, and Paris was the scene of an
outburst of free thought which at one time promised to pass far beyond
the limits of the schools. This outbreak of heresy goes far to explain
the alarm with which the advent of the Arabic Aristotle was at first
regarded. It was followed by a persecution of heretics. In 1210 "a batch
of persons infected with heresy priests and clerks from the neighbouring
Grand-pont were handed over to the secular arm, some for the stake,
others for perpetual imprisonment. At the same time the books of
Aristotle upon natural philosophy and his commentators were forbidden to
be read at Paris publicly or privately for a period of three years."

The rapidity with which Aristotle, and even his Arabic commentators,
lived down these suspicions and was transformed into a pillar of
orthodoxy is one of the most remarkable facts in the history of the
Middle Ages. The study of Aristotle had been forbidden by the Council of
Paris. It was renewed by Pope Gregory IX in 1231 but with the
significant reservation "until they have been examined and purged of all
heresy." But this ban was soon removed. Copies of Aristotle in the
original Greek were obtained from Constantinople, and with the aid of
these the theologians soon learnt the art of distinguishing the genuine
Aristotle from spurious imitations and assisted greatly in the
advancement and purification of science by the resistance they offered
to the study of alchemy, astrology and magic with which in those days it
was associated. In 1254 nearly the whole range of Aristotelian writings
were prescribed by a statue of the Faculty of Arts at Paris as textbooks
for its masters.

These facts, then, make it clear that there was no opposition to the
study of Aristotle and the sciences as such, but to the heresies which
were associated with them. Experience proved that so far from this
opposition being detrimental to the cause of science it had the opposite
effect of furthering its interests by cleansing it of falsities. The
task of proving to the world that faith and science might go hand in
hand was the work of the two great monastic orders of St. Dominic and
St. Francis, which came into existence about this time and immediately
owed their existence to the need of defending Christendom against the
new forces of wealth and learning which threatened it with ruin. The
intellectual life of Europe for the next two centuries is so intimately
bound up with these two great orders that it becomes necessary to pause
to give a brief account of them.

While both of these orders attacked what was ultimately the same
problem, they attacked it in fundamentally different ways. The problem
as St. Francis saw it was that the social evils and heresies had their
root in a corrupted human nature to which men became increasingly liable
as they acquired wealth and so lost touch with the primary facts of
life. St. Francis was a simple, unintellectual layman, and confronted
with the problems of his age, he turned his back upon the world with its
wealth, its learning and its heresies, which he regarded as vanities,
and taught a gospel of poverty, work and renunciation. His followers
were to renounce wealth and all intellectual pursuits and seek salvation
through work. They were to labour among the poor, and in order that they
might be of service to them they were to seek identity with them in
position and fortune. In a word, the Franciscans were the Salvation Army
of their day, differing with them to the extent that they eventually
became one of the great intellectual forces of the age.

St. Dominic approached the problem from the opposite end. It was not
with him so much that the heart was going wrong as the head. He accepted
civilization and its accompaniments. Science, music, architecture,
painting were each to be regarded as a path through which truth could be
approached. But he realized clearly as few people to-day did, until
quite recently when the war shook us out of our complacency, that
knowledge may just as easily be an agent for evil as for good. Nay, more
easily; since left to itself without any central and guiding principle
to co-ordinate its activities, it will, instead of serving the common
interests of mankind, degenerate into mere pedantry by being exalted as
an end in itself, or become a disruptive force by giving rise to
heresies, or be used for selfish and personal ends. Hence it was that
the Dominicans, like the Franciscans, broke with the monastic tradition
of settling in the country and established themselves in the towns, and
firstly in those where universities were established---at Paris, Bologna
and Oxford---in order to keep themselves informed of all the learning of
the day. They realized that though the suppression of heresy might
prevent foolish people, who were carried off their feet by the
introduction of new ideas, from bringing truth itself into discredit by
seeking the popularization of immature thought, yet Mediaeval
civilization could not be preserved merely by repressive measures and
that the only final justification for such repression was as a measure
of expediency to gain time for the proper formulation of thought, in
order that it might be organized into a constructive force instead of
dissipating itself in intellectual subtleties, heresies and disruptive
influences. Their method made for thoroughness and was the enemy of
superficiality.

The Dominicans were not long in demonstrating to the world the wisdom of
their policy. Two great Dominicans, Albertus Magnus and St. Thomas
Aquinas, were the means of purging the reputation of Aristotle of ill
fame by the development of a great system of orthodox Aristotelianism
which drew a clear line between the provinces of science and religion.
"The lines laid down by Aquinas as to the attitude of reason towards
revelation are, amid all change of belief as to the actual content of
revelation, the lines in which, as much in the Protestant as in the
Mediaeval or Modern Roman Churches, the main current of thought has
moved ever since."It revolutionized theology. One of their
contemporaries insists on the absolute novelty of their methods,
arguments, reasons, objections and replies. They not only won back the
universities to the allegiance of the Church but secured for science the
patronage of the Church. Henceforth science becomes a recognized faculty
in every Mediaeval university, and its study is encouraged by the Popes.
John XXII was a great patron of science, as indeed was Pius II. An
extract from his Bull promulgated for the University of Basle in 1460
will bear quotation. It runs: "Among the different blessings which by
the grace of God mortals can attain to in this earthly life, it is not
among the least that, by persevering study, he can make himself master
of the pearls of science and learning which point the way to a good and
useful life. Furthermore, education brings man to a nearer likeness to
God, and enables him to read clearly the secrets of this universe. True
education and learning lift the meanest of earth to a level with the
highest." "For this reason," continues the Pope, "the Holy See has
always encouraged the sciences and contributed to the establishment of
places of learning, in order that men might be enabled to acquire this
precious treasure and, having acquired it, might spread it among their
fellow-men." It was his ardent desire that one of these life-giving
fountains should be established at Basle, so that all who wished might
drink their fill at the waters of learning.\"

Such words did not fall upon deaf ears. The annals of the universities
show how zealously the clergy acted on the Pope's exhortation to study
science not only by advising young men to follow such studies but by
attending as students themselves. For in the Mediaeval universities men
of all ages and from every class of society mingled together. Young men
of peasant origin were there with men of ripe years and of established
position---abbots, provosts, canons and princes. Never were there more
democratic institutions. The comradeship through the university was one
in which all who went there met on equal terms. The universities were
self-governing corporations, they paid no taxes, and were accorded many
privileges as a token of respect to learning. All classes contributed to
their support, but the clergy were by far the most generous.

But to return to our subject. Not only did the labours of Albertus
Magnus and St. Thomas Aquinas effect a re conciliation between the
Church and science by indicating the spirit in which the new teaching
was to be received, but they also wrote upon psychology, metaphysics,
physics, physiology, natural history, morals and social science. The
former especially was an indefatigable student of nature. His twenty-one
folio volumes are considered a perfect encyclopaedia both of the
knowledge and polemics of his time, and it is claimed for them that
together with the compilations of Vincent of Beauvais they laid the
basis of the great scientific encyclopaedias of our day. Albertus,
moreover, applied himself energetically to the experimental sciences.
But the credit for this new departure, which revolutionized the method
of science, belongs to the Franciscans rather than the Dominicans. "They
took up the study of physics and chemistry, not, however, as heretofore,
by the path of theoretical speculation, but by the co-operation of
experiment an advance in method they were the first to establish, and by
which Roger Bacon arrived at the most remarkable results in almost every
branch of physical science."

Now the fact that this new development came through the Franciscans is
interesting, and I think it is fair to assume that it was no accident.
Immediately it was due to the fact that the care of the sick which was
enjoined upon them tended to direct their minds towards the study of
medicine and natural history. But there was a deeper reason. The
Franciscans had a strong practical bend of mind. Learning being
forbidden them by the rule of their order, they naturally acquired the
invaluable habit of observing facts for them selves a habit which
book-learning is very apt to destroy. Men who begin life with much
book-knowledge are very apt to look at things from the special angle
provided by the books they have read and to neglect the lessons which
the observation of facts can teach. It was thus that the Franciscans
renunciation of learning stood them in good stead; it proved to be the
means whereby a new impulse was given to the acquisition of knowledge.
The central idea of Christianity---that the world can only be conquered
by those who are first prepared to renounce it---is a principle of
action that holds good just as much in the intellectual and scientific
as in the moral universe, and I might add that in so far as any progress
has in these days been made in the revival of architecture, the crafts
and arts, it has come about through the actions of men who proceeded
upon this principle. The return to fundamentals always involves
renunciation.

While it is to be acknowledged that the foundations of modern science
were laid in the Middle Ages, it is equally important to recognize that
the new impulse which the Franciscans gave was essentially a Mediaeval
one, and that science remains Mediaeval in its method to this day. For
when the Franciscans threw over the method of theoretical speculation in
favour of co-operation by experiment, they gave practical application in
the realm of science to the method of work which in the Middle Ages
obtained in the arts, for, as we shall see in the next chapter, Gothic
Art was the creation of experimental handicraft, and it was the
abandonment of this method owing to Renaissance influences that finally
led to the disappearance of art from the world. But science never threw
over this Mediaeval experimental, craft basis, which is the secret of
its progressive development, and it remains Mediaeval in method to this
day.

But while science remains Mediaeval in its method, it is no longer
Mediaeval in its spirit, for it has rejected the discipline by which the
Mediaevalists sought to guide it. The judgment of Albertus Magnus and
St. Thomas Aquinas that there were two orders of science---the natural,
comprising everything that can be grasped by reason, and the
supernatural, which comprises all the truth known by revelation was
accepted alike by the Church and the students of science, and the
heretical tendencies which had come with the Arabic Aristotle dwindled
to impotence. Averroistic beliefs lingered on in a more or less
disguised and purely speculative form, disputants in the Arts avoiding
the charge of heresy by taking cover under the convenient distinction
between philosophical and theological truth, maintaining that what was
true in the one might be false in the other and vice versa. But when in
the sixteenth century, owing to the influence of the Renaissance of
which we shall have something to say hereafter, belief in the absolute
truth of the Christian revelation had come to be widely questioned,
there was a new outburst of pantheism and free thought.

It was because of his advocacy of heresies, and not because of his
scientific opinions, that Bruno was put to death. The case of Galileo is
different, and it is too long a story to be gone into here. There were
faults on both sides, but it cannot be maintained that the attitude of
the Church was determined by hostility to science, and in this
connection I cannot do better than quote Huxley, who, writing to
Professor Mivart in 1885, said: "I gave some attention to the case of
Galileo when I was in Italy, and I arrived at the conclusion that the
Popes and the College of Cardinals had rather the best of it."

In judging the attitude of the Church at this period we must not forget
that the Copernican theory had not then been proved, but was only
advanced as a hypothesis and was violently attacked by scientists at the
time. Kepler and Newton finally proved it. What the Church objected to
was not the theory that the earth was round, but the entirely illogical
deduction which Galileo made from it that therefore Christianity was
false. For Christianity has nothing to say on the matter at all. It is
not a theory of the universe, but a theory of conduct basing its claim
for acceptance upon Divine sanction. The Church, moreover, bases its
authority upon the Christian tradition, and not upon the Bible. But the
Church was nervous, and justifiably nervous, at the consequences which
might follow the popularization of such a theory, whether it eventually
proved to be true or not, and had no desire to meet trouble half-way.
For the average man does not discriminate very carefully, and the fact
that the story that Joshua commanded the sun to stand still upon Gibeon
is to be found in the Bible is sufficient in the minds of many to
discredit the whole Christian theology as a degrading superstition and
to release them from all the moral obligations which Christianity sought
to impose. And this nervousness was not felt only by the Roman Church.
Whereas the Church did its best to handle a difficult situation in a
diplomatic way, demanding no more than that scientists should not preach
unproven hypotheses as truth, the leaders of Protestantism were violent
in their opposition. Luther denounced Copernicus as an arrogant fool who
would overthrow all scientific astronomy and contradicted Holy Writ,
while Melanchthon wished the promulgation of such pestilent doctrines to
be suppressed by the civil power.In the turmoil of the Reformation
science and heresy became more closely related though by no means
identified, for science was followed and encouraged as much by the
post-Reformation Church as by the Mediaeval one.

It is to be observed that heresy is not necessarily a belief in
something false, but an exaggeration of one aspect of truth insisted
upon to the damage or denial of other and equally important truths. The
tendency of scientists to exaggerate the importance of the material side
of things whilst ignoring as imponderable the spiritual and moral side
of life is their peculiar form of heresy. It results in a loss of mental
balance, a failure to see life as a whole, in its true proportions. It
makes the scientist an untrustworthy guide in the practical affairs of
life. The publication of Lord Bacon's *Advancement of Learning* and the
*Novum Organum* served only to increase the tendency of the scientific
mind towards monomania---a tendency which appears to be the inevitable
accompaniment of an exclusive pre occupation with the study of
phenomena. The inductive method is the method of reasoning familiar to
all who concern themselves with the practical arts, and is invaluable
for the attainment of certain immediate and definite ends. But the
attempt of Bacon to give it universal validity---for, as Macaulay said,
it is ridiculous to suppose he invented it must after the experience of
over three centuries of work upon such lines be judged a failure, for
science is as far from the truth of things as ever. "After a glorious
burst of perhaps fifty years, amid great acclamation and good hopes that
the crafty old universe was going to be caught in her careful net,
science finds herself in almost every direction in the most hopeless
quandaries; and whether the rib story be true or not, has, at any rate,
provided no very satisfactory substitute for it."

The reason for this failure is obvious. There is no such thing as a
purely materialist explanation of the universe. Final causation is not
to be found in the material world, and scientists, in excluding the
spiritual side of things from their calculations as imponderable,
exclude the consideration of those things which might offer an
explanation. For unity is to be found at the centre of life; it is not
to be deduced merely from a study of phenomena on the circumference. But
even if science were to follow the lead given by Sir Oliver Lodge and
carried its investigations beyond the material into the realm of psychic
phenomena, it could never penetrate the final mystery of life. The moral
principles to which religions give sanction are finally commandments and
incapable of rationalist explanation, though experience of their working
may be able to give them rationalist justification. They are not to be
deduced from the study of phenomena, but rest finally on the affirmation
of the supernatural.

While it must be admitted that reasoning based exclusively upon
phenomena has failed to penetrate the mystery of the universe, the
invasion of other departments of inquiry by the inductive method of
reasoning, such as that of sociology has been followed by results
equally disastrous. It has produced endless confusion. It is possible to
deduce secondary truth from primary truth, but not the reverse, which
science attempts. I sometimes think that the Devil made his debut in the
modern world as the friend of learning, which he had the insight to see
might be used for the purpose of banishing wisdom by the simple and
apparently innocent device of multiplying knowledge. At any rate,
whether the Devil planned or no, such has been its practical effect. For
the multiplication of knowledge has certainly introduced confusion into
the popular mind. Thus it has come about that the scientific method of
inquiry has had the effect of burying primary truth under an avalanche
of secondary half-truths. It has exalted knowledge above wisdom,
mechanism above art, science above religion, man above God. In thus
reversing the natural order of the moral and intellectual universe, it
has led to a general state ofmental bewilderment such as was never
before witnessed. The ambition of the scientist to comprehend all
knowledge has been followed by the unfortunate discovery that
knowledge---the things to be known---is bigger than his head, and he
gets some inkling of the meaning of the proverb: "A fool's eyes are on
the ends of the earth."

Considerations of this kind lead me to the conclusion that civilization
has reached a turning-point not only in its political and economic
history, but in its very methods and ideas, and that the next
development must be away from the universal towards a reassertion of the
principle of unity which was the central principle of Mediaeval thought.
In the new synthesis which will appear, science will not attempt to lead
mankind, but will be content with a secondary and subordinate position.
Science has terribly misled the world. But it is possible that all its
work has not been in vain. For it has explored the universe for us, and
as a result of its labours it may be that when the new order does arrive
it will rest on much surer foundations than ever did the civilizations
of the past. With the knowledge of evil which science let loose upon the
world, we know where the pitfalls lie. But we shall never be able to
conquer this mass of knowledge which science has given us until we have
first the courage to renounce it.

# The Arts of the Middle Ages

In an earlier chapter I said that the promise of Medievalism was never
entirely fulfilled. That is true of its life and social organization.
The sinister influence of Roman Law began to dissolve it before it was
as yet firmly established. But it is not true of the Arts, for in them
the promise was entirely fulfilled, and for this consummation we are
indebted to the two great Mediaeval orders---the Dominicans and the
Francis cans; the former because of their intellectual orthodoxy, which
preserved Mediaeval society from disruption at the hands of the
heretics, and because of the encouragement and help they gave to the
development of the Arts, and the latter because of the new spirit and
vitality which they breathed into Mediaeval society. It would not be
untrue to say that from the beginning of the thirteenth century the
Mediaeval spirit as it expressed itself in thought and in the Arts was
the resultant of the action and interaction of the Dominican and
Franciscan minds. The latter, by their emotional temperament and broad
democratic sympathies, tended to widen the range of experience, to
venture on new experiments and to encourage new developments, while the
function of the former was to be for ever gathering up, as it were, to
bring unity and order out of the diversity to which the Franciscan
spirit ever tended. Yet the more these two orders differed, the more
they were alike. They were alike in their absolute belief in
Christianity as the truth revealed, and in their detestation of the
pantheistic rationalism which began to show its head at the beginning of
the thirteenth century, and which they combined to crush.

Gothic Art, which reached its perfection in the thirteenth, fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries, was a tree with very deep roots, and its
progressive development may be dated from the year A.D. 800, when
Charlemagne, after driving the Saracens out of France, consolidated his
power and was crowned by the Pope Emperor of the West. For this date is
not only a definite landmark in the political history of Europe, but it
marks a turning-point in the history of the Arts, for Charlemagne was
more than a successful warrior; he was a great patron of culture, and
endeavoured successfully to make the heart of his Empire a centre of
culture and learning. The Palatine Church of Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle),
built by him as a national monument, may be said to have set in motion
ideas of architecture which affected the whole of Western Europe. To
this Carlovingian centre there came craftsmen from far and wide---from
Spain, Lombardy, and the Eastern Empire---for it was the ambition of
Charlemagne to gather together such remnants of Roman tradition as had
survived the barbarian invasions in order to effect a revival of the
Arts. His intention was to revive the Roman Art whose splendid remains
then overspread the whole of Gaul. But from this renaissance there arose
results far different from what he had anticipated, differing from them,
in fact, as widely as his Empire differed from that of the Caesars. His
object of revivifying Art was achieved, but not in the way he proposed,
for in the space of three centuries the movement he set on foot led to
the creation of an entirely new style, which, though it long bore traces
of its origin, was nevertheless, as a whole, unlike anything the world
had ever seen before; in a word, Gothic Art.

The immediate reason for this result, so different from what Charlemagne
had anticipated, is to be found in the fact that the craftsmen whom he
gathered together were possessed of traditions of design differing
widely from those of antiquity. They were, moreover, men of a different
order. The Roman workmen executed designs prepared by an architect in
much the same way as do the workmen of to-day, but their labour was
essentially servile. But these newer craftsmen, however, not only
executed work but were themselves individually capable of exercising the
function of design. Moreover, they were capable of co-operating
together, for they shared a communal tradition of design in the same way
that people share a communal tradition of language. Each craftsman
worked as a link in this chain of tradition, and this changed method
produced a different type of architecture. It was a communal
architecture, while that of the Roman was individual. Not individual in
the modern sense, for all Roman architects practised the same style, but
individual in the sense that a Roman building was the design of one man
who directed the workman in regard to the details of his work, and no
room was left for the initiative of the individual craftsman.

It is the variety of detail due to the initiative of individuals that
lends an interest to Gothic architecture far and away beyond that of the
personal architecture of the architect. It has a richer texture. For in
a communal art "each product has a substance and content to which the
greatest individual artists cannot hope to attain---it is the result of
organic processes of thought and work. A great artist might make a
little advance, a poor artist might stand a little behind; but the work,
as a whole, was customary, and was shaped and perfected by a
life-experience whose span was centuries."

In the Middle Ages every craft possessed such communal traditions of
design, and each craftsman produced the designs that he executed. But in
the production of architecture there must needs be some one to
co-ordinate the efforts of the individual craftsmen. This position in
the Mediaeval period was occupied by the master mason or master
carpenter, as the case might be, who exercised a general control in
addition to the ordinary requirements of his craft. He differed from the
architect of Roman times to the extent that his function was not to give
detailed designs for others to execute, but to co-ordinate the efforts
of living units; it was the custom then for each craft to supply its own
details and ornaments.

This different system naturally gave different results. Roman
architecture, or, to be more correct, the Greek, from which it was
derived, was refined and intellectual. It was as Lowell said:--

>  As unanswerable as Euclid,
>
> The one thing finished in this hasty world.

In other words, it was a kind of aesthetic cul-de-sac from which the
only escape was backwards by a return to the crafts: for it is only by
and through the actual experiment with material that new ideas in detail
can be evolved. A skilful architect may have fine general ideas, but he
will have no new ideas of detail. Such details as he does use will be
studied from the work done in the past by actual craftsmen, for, as I
have already said, it is by actually handling material that new ideas of
detail can be evolved. Hence it was that the Mediaeval system of
building, by giving the master minds opportunities for actually working
on their buildings, developed a richness and wealth of detail unknown to
Greek or Roman work. And what is of further interest, all the details to
which Gothic Art gave rise had a peculiar relation to the material used.
Greek and Roman architecture is abstract form which is applied more or
less indifferently to any material. But it is one of the aims of Gothic
design to bring out the intrinsic qualities of the materials. The
details in each case are peculiar to the material used. Thus, in carving
any natural object, it would be the aim of the craftsman not merely to
suggest the general form of the thing intended, but to suggest, in
addition, the qualities of the material in which it is executed. The
treatment would, therefore, be conventionalized---a lion would
emphatically be a wooden lion, a stone lion or a bronze lion, as the
case might be. It would never be a merely naturalistic lion: in each
case there would be no mistaking the material of which it was made, for
the form would be developed upon lines which the technical production of
each most readily suggests. That is the secret of convention.

Now, this change from the Roman to the Gothic method of work is finally
to be accounted for by the fact that, since the day when the Roman style
was practised, Christianity had triumphed in the world, and with it a
new spirit had come into existence. In Greece and Rome the humble worker
had been treated with scorn by men of science and philosophers. The
ordinary man accepted his inferior status as necessary to the natural
order of things. Even slaves did not regard their position as contrary
to morality and right. In the thousand revolts of the slaves of
antiquity there was never any appeal to any ethical principle or
assertion of human rights. On the contrary, they were purely and simply
appeals to force by men who thought themselves sufficiently strong to
rebel successfully. But while these revolts failed to abolish
slavery---for there was never a successful slave revolt---Christianity
succeeded, by effecting a change of spirit which gradually dissolved the
old order. It transformed society by bringing about a state of things in
which human values took precedence over economic values. Little by
little this changed spirit came to affect the Arts. The humble worker
began to gain confidence, and to think and feel on his own account. This
changed feeling, combined with the communal spirit which Christianity
everywhere fostered, tended to bring into existence those communal
traditions of handicraft which reached their most consummate expression
in Gothic Art. For Gothic Art is just as democratic in spirit as the
Greek and Roman is servile. Every line of Gothic Art contradicts the
popularly accepted notion that the Middle Ages was a period of gloom and
repression. The riot of carving, the gaiety and vigour of the little
grotesques that peer out from pillars and cornices, the pure and joyous
colour of frescoes and illuminated manuscripts, the delight in work that
overflowed in free and beautiful details in the common articles of daily
use, tell the tale of a rich and abounding life, just as much as the
unanswerable logic of Greek architecture tells of a life oppressed with
the sense of fate.

It is important that these fundamental differences should be
acknowledged. Gothic architecture was the visible expression, the
flowering of the dogmas of Christianity, and it cannot finally be
separated from them. Apart from them, it would never have come into
existence. It was precisely because the men of the Middle Ages had their
minds at rest about the thousand and one doubts and difficulties which
perplex us, as they perplexed the Greeks, that it was possible for them
to develop that wonderful sense of romantic beauty which enabled them to
build the cathedrals, abbeys, and churches that cover Europe. If the
acceptance of dogmas puts boundaries to the intellect in one direction,
it does so to break down barriers in another, for dogmas do not strangle
thought, but cause it to flow in a different direction. Under Paganism
thought flowed inwards, giving us philosophy; under Christianity it
flows outwards, giving us the Arts, Guilds and economics. Gothic Art,
like Christian dogmas, rests finally upon affirmations. It seems to say:
This is the right way of treating stonework; this, brickwork; this,
leadwork; and so on. And it says all these things with authority in
terms that admit of no ambiguity.

While Gothic Art was democratic in spirit the Mediaeval craftsman
understood clearly the limits of liberty. He knew that liberty was only
possible on the assumption that boundaries were respected, and that
there is no such thing as liberty absolute. Liberty is possible on
certain terms. It involves in the first place a recognition of the
authority of ultimate truth, or, in other words, of dogmas, because
authority is in the nature of things, and men who refuse to accept the
authority of dogmas will find themselves finally compelled to acquiesce
in the authority of persons. That is why revolutions which begin by
seeking to overturn the authority of ideas invariably end by
establishing the authority of persons. A respect for authority of ideas
is naturally accompanied by a respect for mastership, which is a
fundamentally different thing from authority of persons. For whereas, in
the latter case, the authority is necessarily exercised arbitrarily, in
the former it is not so. The pupil asks the master how to do a thing
because he wants to know. But the employer tells the servant what he
requires doing because the servant has no desire to know. That is the
difference between the two relationships. That feeling of personal
antagonism which exists between employers and workers to-day did not
exist between the masters and journeymen of the Mediaeval Guilds,
because the difference between them was not primarily a difference of
economic status, but of knowledge and skill. Well has it been said that
"producers of good articles respect one another; producers of bad
articles despise one another."

A respect for the principle of mastership permeated Mediaeval society,
while it informed the organization of the Guilds. "In the Middle Ages,"
says Professor Lethaby, "the Masons and Carpenters Guilds were faculties
or colleges of education in those arts, and every town was, so to say, a
craft university. Corporations of Masons, Carpenters, and the like, were
established in the towns; each craft aspired to have a college hall. The
universities themselves had been well named by a recent historian
'Scholars' Guilds.' The Guild, which recognized all the customs of its
trade, guaranteed the relations of the apprentice and master craftsman
with whom he was placed; but he was really apprenticed to the craft as a
whole, and ultimately to the city whose freedom he engaged to take up.
He was, in fact, a graduate of his craft college, and wore its robes. At
a later stage the apprentice became a companion or bachelor of his art,
or by producing a master-work, the thesis of his craft, he was admitted
a master. Only then was he permitted to become an employer of labour, or
was admitted as one of the governing body of his college. As a citizen,
city dignities were open to him. He might become the master in building
some abbey or cathedral, or, as King's mason, become a member of the
royal household, the acknowledged great master of his time in
mason-craft. With such a system, was it so very wonderful that the
buildings of the Middle Ages, which were, indeed, wonderful, should have
been produced?"

Such, then, was the foundation on which Gothic architecture was built.
In its earlier phase, as we meet it in this country in the Norman
architecture of the twelfth century, it is characterized by a strong
handling of masses. The Norman builders had "a sense of the large
proportions of things," a firm grip of things fundamental. In this early
work only a bare minimum of mouldings and ornaments are used, but such
as are used are strong and vigorous. The general arrangement of parts
which we find in Norman work persists through all the phases of Gothic,
but the details or secondary parts, the trimmings, as it were, receive
more and more attention, until finally, in the sixteenth century, the
last phase is reached in Tudor work, when Gothic degenerates into an
uninspired formula, and the multiplication of mechanical and accessory
parts entirely destroys the sense of spaciousness, which is the mark of
all fine architecture. This last phase is exemplified in this country in
Henry VII Chapel at Westminster Abbey and King's College Chapel,
Cambridge, as in the various Hotels de Ville of Flanders. Though
architecture of this kind has the admiration of Baedeker,it is simply
awful stuff. It is Gothic in its dotage, as anybody who knows anything
about architecture is aware.

Though there is much very beautiful architecture of the fifteenth
century, it is apparent that the decline of Gothic d?tes from the middle
of the century. From that time onwards, it is, generally speaking, true
to say that the most important buildings in the civic sense are the
least important from an architectural point of view. Most of the best
examples of later Gothic are to be found where there was not too much
money to spend, for after the middle of the fifteenth century the
restraining influence in design does not appear to come from the taste
of the craftsmen, but from the poverty of their clients.

The most important examples of Gothic are to be found in Northern
France. In the early part of the twelfth century Paris became the
cultural centre of Europe, and it remained throughout the Middle Ages
the centre of thought and culture. It was here that the Gothic Cathedral
in its essence as a kind of energetic structure in which the various
parts of pillars, vaults and buttresses balance each other was
developed. In 1140 the abbey church of St. Denis, a few miles from
Paris, was begun, and completed within a few years, and it established
the type and set the tradition which all subsequent cathedral builders
followed. First came the cathedrals of Paris, Chartres and Rouen, and
later the celebrated culminating group of Amiens, Beauvais, Bourges and
Rheims, which are generally regarded as the high-water mark of Gothic
achievement.

All other Gothic architecture derives from the parent stock of France.
But to me the branches are more interesting than the stem. For though
there is a magnificence and daring about French Gothic, and though we
are indebted to it for the germ ideas, there is too much effort about it
to satisfy my taste entirely. It lacks the sobriety and reserve of the
Gothic of England, Flanders, and Italy. The brick cathedrals and
churches of Belgium have a wonderfully fine quality about them, though
their plastered interiors are entirely devoid of interest. Only in Italy
has brickwork been so successfully treated. Gothic never took root
properly in Italy, and the more ambitious attempts at it, as are to be
seen at Orvieto and Milan cathedrals, are dreadful failures so far as
the exteriors are concerned. But the simpler forms of Italian Gothic in
civil and domestic work and in some of the smaller churches are
exquisite in taste. It is a thousand pities that the development of
Gothic in Italy should have been arrested by the coming of the
Renaissance, for there are unexplored possibilities in it which may
prove to be the germ of a great revival some day in Italy, if not
elsewhere.

In comparing Gothic with other styles of architecture, the most
extraordinary thing is that Gothic buildings, which are badly
proportioned and entirely indefensible from a strict architectural
standpoint, have a way of looking quaint and interesting. Take the case
of the belfry at Bruges, which Mr. Chesterton once said was like a swan
with a very long neck. The tower is out of all proportion with the
building, and the various stages of it are out of proportion with each
other; it was added to from time to time, and in any other style of
architecture a building so badly proportioned would be a monstrosity.
Yet there is a charm about this belfry which it is impossible to deny,
and if we seek for the final cause of it, I think we shall find it in
the vagaries of craftsmanship, in the liberty of the craftsman who was
part of a great tradition.

# The Franciscans and the Renaissance

The stimulus which was given to thought and discovery in the thirteenth
century by the recovery of the works of Aristotle was the beginning of
an awakened interest in the literature and art of Paganism which
culminated in that many-sided movement which we know as the Renaissance.
The movement originated in Italy and spread itself over France, England,
and Germany. It is the turning-point in the history of Western Europe
and is not to be understood if it is regarded as a rebellion against
Christianity; for in its origin it was nothing of the kind, but a
reaction against the perversion of the Christian ideal at the hands of
the Franciscans. The Renaissance was at the same time a continuation of
and a reaction against the forces which St. Francis set in motion, while
only in a secondary sense is it to be regarded as a reaction against the
scholasticism of the Dominicans.

In order to see the Renaissance in its proper perspective, it is
necessary to realize the significance and influence of the Franciscans
in the thirteenth century. They stood in the same relation to the Middle
Ages as the Socialist Movement does to the modern world, in that the
Franciscans were the central driving force which created the issues in
morals and economics which occupied the thought of the Middle Ages.
Moreover, as with the Socialist Movement, the problem of poverty was
their primary concern, but they attacked it from a different angle and
by a different method. They did not approach it from the point of view
of economics, though their activities led to economic discussions, but
from the point of view of human brotherhood. This different method of
approach was due partly to the fact that they approached it as
Christians appealing to Christians, and partly because in the Middle
Ages poverty was not the problem it is to-day---something organic with
the structure of society---but a thing that was essentially local and
accidental. It did not owe its existence to the fact that society was
organized on a basis fundamentally false as is the case to-day, but
because the Mediaeval organization, good as it was, was not co-extensive
with society. Poverty existed on the fringes of society, not at its
centres.

The problem arose as a consequence of the development of trade. The
monastic orders, as we saw, were the pioneers of civilization in Western
Europe. They settled down in the waste places, cleared the woods and
drained the swamps, and around them there gradually grew up the hamlets
and towns of Mediaeval Europe. But a time came when new towns began to
spring up to meet the requirements of trade, and in the new mercantile
towns of Italy and Southern France the lower grades of the population
were woefully neglected by the secular clergy, and in consequence had
grown up wild and ignorant of every form of religious worship and
secular instruction, while they lived in poverty and dirt. It was
against such ignorance and neglect that the Franciscans resolved to
fight, and it was in order that they might be of service to the poor
that they sought identity with them in position and fortune. This was
the origin of the gospel of poverty that they taught, and which by the
middle of the thirteenth century their zeal and militant spirit had
carried far and wide over Christendom; for they were great preachers.
But while they were a force in all the great centres of Mediaeval
Europe, they were exceptionally strong in their home in Italy. The huge
churches built for them without piers in the interior, and which are
found all over Italy, testify to the large crowds to which they were
accustomed to preach. But with the success which followed them there
came a perversion of their original idea. Poverty as taught by St.
Francis was a means to an end. It was recommended to his followers in
order that they might be of service to the poor. But after a time this
original idea tended to recede into the background, and in time poverty
came to be looked upon as the essence of religion. When, therefore, the
excesses of this ideal began to make religious life impossible for all
except the very poor, it produced the inevitable reaction. An
influential party among the Franciscans sought to have the original rule
modified in order to bring it more into accord with the dictates of
reason and experience. But in this effort they were obstinately opposed
by a minority in the Order who refused to have any part in such
relaxations. The recriminations between these two branches of the Order
at last became so bitter that appeal was made to the Pope to judge
between them. He appointed a commission of cardinals and theologians to
inquire into the issues involved, and quite reasonably gave a decision
in favour of the moderate party. But this only embittered the extreme
party, who now denied the authority of the Pope to interfere with the
internal discipline of the Order, affirming that only St. Francis could
undo what St. Francis himself had bound up. From attacking the Pope they
went on to attack the wealthy clergy, maintaining that wealth was
incompatible with the teachings of Christ, and from that they went on to
attack the institution of property as such. It was thus that the split
in the Franciscans led to those discussions about the ethics of property
which occupied so much of the thought of the Mediaeval economists. This
question, studied in the light of Aristotle, led St. Thomas Aquinas to
formulate those social principles, which became accepted as the
standards of Catholic orthodoxy, as at a later date led St. Antonino to
affirm that "poverty is not a good thing; in itself it is an evil, and
can be considered to lead only accidentally to any good."

Without doubt St. Antonino had the Franciscan gospel of poverty in mind
when he made this utterance. He realized the terrible evils which would
follow the divorce of religion from everyday life if an ideal beyond the
capacity of the average normal man were insisted upon. Moreover, in the
early part of the fourteenth century the Franciscans themselves had
fallen from their high estate. It is a fact of psychology that an excess
of idealism will be followed by a fall from grace, and the Franciscans
fell very low indeed. The high moral plane on which they sought to live
was too much for them. The moment they relaxed from their strenuous
activity they became corrupted by the degraded environment in which they
found themselves, and rapidly sank to that depth of coarseness,
meanness, and sinfulness which has been so well described by Chaucer.
The once popular Franciscans now became objects of the same scorn and
ridicule as the monks of the Benedictine and Cistercian Orders.

We saw there was a reaction against the rule of St. Francis within the
Franciscan Order. There was now to come a reaction from without, and the
immediate form it took was a reassertion of those very things which St.
Francis forbade his followers scholarship and the world. An insistence
upon the value of these is the keynote of the Humanists whose labours
inaugurated the Renaissance. The men of the Early Renaissance were not
opposed to Christianity, but to what they conceived to be the perversion
of its ideal at the hands of the Franciscans. Against the Franciscan
conception of life they warred incessantly. Their enthusiasm for Pagan
literature was inspired by the belief that its study would lead to a
fuller understanding of Christianity. In it was to be found most
precious material for the cultivation of the mind and for the
purification of moral life. Its popularization would, moreover, tend to
restore the balance between the religious and secular sides of life
which the exaggerated teachings of the Franciscans had temporarily
upset. They had no sympathy with the later Humanists who regarded
learning as an end in itself. On the contrary, classic literature was by
them only valued as a means to an end the end being the Christian life.
The position was not a new one. Classic literature, as such, had never
been banned by the Church. Already in the first centuries of
Christianity the Fathers of the Church had pursued and advocated the
study of the literature of Greece and Rome. But they had exercised
discrimination. They recognized that while many classic works had been
inspired by lofty sentiments, such was not by any means always the case,
and that while many books had been written in Pagan times merely to
extol vice, there were many other books which, though they had no such
object, might be used by vicious-minded persons as apologetics for vice,
and so discrimination had been made. The classic authors who were above
suspicion were taken into the bosom of the Church. St. Augustine had
based his theology upon the Platonic philosophy. The *Aeneid* of Virgil
came to be looked upon almost as a sacred book, loved and honoured as
much by Christian Fathers as by Roman scholars. Virgil had remained with
the Church all through the Dark Ages and lived to inspire the Divine
Comedy of Dante a century and a half before the Revival of Learning was
inaugurated by Petrarch. All through this period great value was set
upon such classic authors as the Church had sanctioned and had survived
the wreck of Roman civilization. The Benedictines preserved in their
monasteries a knowledge of the Latin classics. Virgil, Horace, Statius,
Sallust, Terence, Cicero, Quintilian, Ovid, Lucan, Martial, Caesar, Livy
and Suetonius were known and studied by them. But though the Latin
classics and the Latin language were never wholly lost, the fortunes of
the Greek classics were very different. After the fall of the Western
Empire in the fifth century a knowledge of classical Greek rapidly faded
out of the West, becoming practically extinct, and with it disappeared
from Western Europe any knowledge of the works of Plato, Aristotle and
other Greek authors. From about the end of the tenth century a knowledge
of the Latin classics began to be more widely diffused. But the
incipient revival of a better literary taste was checked at the
beginning of the thirteenth century by the re-discovery of Aristotle
which was followed by such a great awakening that for the time being he
came to monopolize intellectual interests and the Latin classics that
had been studied before Aristotle came along fell into neglect. In this
light the Revival of Learning appears in the first place as an endeavour
to take up the threads of the Latin culture of the pre-Aristotelian
period of a hundred years before, and in the next to subject them to a
more systematic study. In another later and quite secondary sense it
became a movement of poets or men of letters against philosophers.In no
sense can the Revival of Learning in its early stages be regarded as a
rebellion against Christianity. The early Humanists were not looked upon
as dangerous and destructive innovators. Aristotle had been made a
bulwark against heresy by the efforts of Albertus Magnus and St. Thomas
Aquinas, and at the time there seemed no reason to suppose that the
study of other authors of antiquity could not be similarly reconciled
and incorporated in the Christian theology. This spirit of
reconciliation survived through the greater part of the fifteenth
century, and when, after the fall of Constantinople in 1453, a priceless
cargo of Greek manuscripts arrived in Italy together with numerous Greek
scholars, Plato was studied in this same spirit of reconciliation. The
proof that the Platonists of the Renaissance were genuinely inspired by
religious motives is to be found in the fact that both Marsilio Ficino
and Pico della Mirandola eventually came entirely under the influence of
Savonarola. Ficino entered the Church. Pico burned his love-poems,
decided to become a friar, and was only prevented by death.

Such was the ideal of the Early Renaissance. The changed ideal which is
the mark of the Later Renaissance is to be accounted for by a growing
consciousness on the part of the Humanists of the ultimate
irreconcilability between the Pagan and Christian attitudes towards
life, if not always between the Pagan and Christian philosophies. They
began to ask themselves the question whether the Pagan world was not a
bigger, broader and more humane one than the Christian world with which
they were familiar, whether, in fact, the life of the senses which
Paganism avowed was not the life which it was intended that man should
live and whether Christianity, by placing restraints upon the natural
impulses of man, had not frustrated the ends of life. In an earlier age
under other circumstances such thoughts would have been resisted as
coming from the Devil. But they did not appear as such to men who lived
in an atmosphere of intellectual and aesthetic intoxication, in a
society in which the recovery of the remains of Greek and Roman Art was
proving a new source of guidance and inspiration.

Now it is important to recognize that the ideas with which the Humanists
had now become familiar fascinated their minds because at the time they
understood neither Paganism nor Christianity. On the one hand they did
not realize the slough of despondency into which Pagan civilization had
fallen, while they were not familiar with Christianity as it had been
understood at an earlier age but with its perversion at the hands of the
Franciscans. For it is well to remember that Christianity had never
denied the life of the senses. The doctrine of the Resurrection of the
Body is an eternal witness to that fact. For it was formulated, as we
saw, as a means of combating the Manichean heresy, which *did* deny the
sensuous life of man. But while on the one hand Christianity thereby
acknowledged "that in any final con summation the bodily life of man
must find a place no less than the spiritual," on the other it clearly
apprehended the dangers to which the sensuous life of man was exposed,
affirming that the exercise of restraint alone could guarantee emotional
continuity. Deprived of a restraining influence, man rapidly exhausts
his emotional capacity. The man who is for ever seeking experience and
expression, because experience and expression are natural to the healthy
normal man, soon becomes emotionally bankrupt. He becomes blase. So it
was with the later Humanists. When the spell which bound them to
Christian beliefs had been broken no power on earth could stop them once
they were fairly embarked on the pursuit of pleasure. They went from
excess to excess, from debauchery to debauchery in a vain search for new
experiences, while they took especial pleasure in the works of Petronius
and the other disreputable authors of Antiquity who sought to make vice
attractive. Whatever else these later Humanists failed to do, they
certainly succeeded in reviving the sensuality and epicureanism of Rome.
The Papacy, which had become associated with the revival, became a
veritable centre of corruption. When the young Giovanni de Medici went
to Rome his father Lorenzo warned him to beware of his conduct in that
"sink of iniquity." And the warning was not given without good reason.
The best-known Popes between the years 1458-1522 were all more or less
unscrupulous evil-doers. Sixtus IV was an accomplice in the plot against
the Medici which ended in the murder of Giuliano. Alexander VI shows an
almost unparalleled record of crimes. In this society poison became a
fine art, simony and theft everyday occurrences, and where the Popes
led, the cardinals followed. Alexander's illegitimate son, Caesar
Borgia, chief among them, was the hero of Machiavelli. If these monsters
had lived in the Middle Ages, we should never have heard the last of
them. A record of their crimes would have been considered an
indispensable part of every child's education. But, as it is, their
story is reserved for the few, while they are treated with a certain
curiosity, not to say indulgence, as patrons of culture.

What happened to religion happened to the arts. The ideas of the
Renaissance were in each case their destruction. The spirit of
reconciliation which was characteristic of the thought of the Early
Renaissance is reflected in the arts of the period. This is especially
true of the Italian architecture and the painting and sculpture of the
fifteenth century, which is Gothic in spirit and general conception
combined with details derived from the study of Roman work. In the work
of this period the Gothic and Roman elements are always present, and the
blend is exquisite. But this great moment of transition did not last for
long. The Gothic element begins to disappear, and with the arrival of
Michelangelo it is entirely eliminated. The decline begins to set in,
for Michelangelo introduced a manner which proved fatal to all the arts.
That delight in natural objects, in flowers and birds, in quaint things
and queer things, which is so peculiar to Gothic art, which probably
owes its origin to the influence of St. Francis and which made the arts
of the Middle Ages so democratic in their expression, is now no more.
Michelangelo eliminated everything that gave to art its human interest
and concentrated attention entirely upon abstract form. In the hands of
a great master such a treatment of art is great, though cold and
austere, but in the hands of lesser men it became ridiculous, for the
manner of Michelangelo was just as much beyond the capacity of the
average artist and craftsmen as the life of poverty which St. Francis
recommended to his followers was normally beyond the capacity of the
ordinary man. And Michelangelo set the fashion in all the arts.
Mediaeval sculpture was rich in decorative detail, but after
Michelangelo sculpture became identified with the nude. Mediaeval
painting was rich in design and colour, but after Michelangelo its
primary concern is with light and shade. Paradoxically, Michelangelo
introduced the very opposite principle into the treatment of
architecture. For he does not simplify, but elaborates it. Prior to
Michelangelo architecture was simple in its treatment, while elaboration
was confined to the decorative crafts, but now, having robbed painting
and sculpture of their decorative qualities, he sought to obtain the
contrasts he required by making architecture itself a decorative thing.
This he did by multiplying the number of its mechanical parts.
Michelangelo disregarded altogether the structural basis of
architectural design, and in his hands architecture became a mere
theatrical exhibition of columns, pilasters, pediments, etc. Thus he
inaugurated that evil tradition in which architecture and building are
divorced, against which we fight in vain to this day.

But Michelangelo was not the only cause of the decline. Architecture
might have survived the introduction of his mannerisms had it not been
that in the sixteenth century the works of Vitruvius were unearthed. He
had reduced Roman architecture to a system of external rules and pro
portions and his re-discovery was the greatest misfortune which ever
befell architecture. Though Vitruvius was a very inferior architect,
absurd homage was paid to him because he happened to be the only
architectural writer whose works were preserved from antiquity. He was
exalted by the architects of the time as a most certain and infallible
guide as to what was and what was not a proper proportion. We know from
the writings of Serlio, an architect of the period who did much to
establish the reputation of Vitruvius, that the craftsmen of the time
objected to the pedantic idea that only one set of proportions was
allowable; that there was one way of doing things and no other, and in a
couple of pamphlets written by two German master builders of the time,
Matthew Boritzer and Lawrence Lacherprotests are made against this new
way of regarding architecture, and they insist that the highest art is
the result of inward laws controlling the outward form. But such
protests availed nothing against the pedantry of the architects, whose
prestige enabled them to get their own way in spite of the objections
from the building trade. Henceforth there is an increasing insistence
everywhere upon Roman precedents in design, and care is given to the
secondary details, while the fundamental ideas of plan and grouping are
overtaken by paralysis. Architecture, from being something vital and
organic in the nature of a growth, became a matter of external rules and
proportions, applied more or less indifferently to any type of building,
quite regardless either of internal convenience or structural necessity.
When this point of development was reached, any co-operation among the
crafts and arts which had survived from the Middle Ages came to an end.
Henceforth painting and sculpture became entirely separated from
architecture and continued an independent existence in studios and
galleries, while the minor crafts degenerated solely into matters of
trade and commerce.

The growth of pedantry in architecture was assisted by a change in the
organization of the crafts which followed the introduction of
Renaissance ideas. In the Middle Ages it was, as we saw, the custom for
craftsmen to supply their own designs, and if every craftsman were not a
designer, at any rate every designer was a craftsman. But with the
revival of Roman ideas of design there came into existence a caste of
architects and designers over and above the craftsmen of the building
trades, who supplied designs which the craftsmen carried into execution.
At first these architects had to proceed very warily, for the craftsmen
did not seem to care very much about this new arrangement. Thus we read
that Sir Christopher Wren, when sending his small-scale plans and
directions for the library at Trinity College, Cambridge, adds: "I
suppose you have good masons; however, I would willingly take a further
pains to give all the mouldings in great; we are scrupulous in small
matters, and you must pardon us, the architects are as great pedants as
critics and heralds." This letter is interesting, not only because it
testifies to the existence of trained schools of masons and carpenters
who had their own traditions of design and could be trusted to apply
them, but to the growing spirit of pedantry which proved to be the death
of architecture. So long as architecture had its roots firmly in the
crafts such a development was impossible. But with the separation of the
functions of design and execution and the rise of a school of architects
who were proud of their scholarly attainments, pedantry grew apace. The
craftsman, compelled to execute designs made by others, gradually lost
his faculty of design, while the architect, deprived of the suggestion
in design which the actual handling of material gives, naturally fell
back more and more upon Roman precedent, until, finally, all power of
invention in design came to an end and architecture expired at the end
of the eighteenth century. Since then a succession of revivals have been
attempted which have succeeded in producing a certain number of
interesting buildings but not in effecting a general revival of
architecture.

Fortunately during this period of decline, architects were few in
number, and were only employed on the most expensive work. The great
mass of building was designed, as well as executed, by builders. While
the architects were engaged in producing those monstrous platitudes in
the "grand manner," known as monumental architecture, these builders
were engaged in the development of a style of work which carried on the
vigorous traditions of Gothic craftsmanship, while it made use of such
Roman forms as could readily be assimilated. This vernacular
architecture, which in this country we know by the names of Elizabethan,
Jacobean, Queen Anne and Georgian, is the really genuine architecture of
the Renaissance period, and it reacted to give the architects an
endowment of traditional English taste which kept the academic
tendencies of the Renaissance within certain bounds. But in the latter
half of the eighteenth century the pedantic ideas of the architects,
owing to the prestige of London, became enforced as stringent standards
over the whole country, and this vernacular architecture came to an end.

The Franciscans and the Renaissance 137

While thus we see the Renaissance ended by destroying communal
traditions in the arts, it destroyed also the communal traditions of
culture of the Middle Ages. This culture, which had its basis in common
religious ideas, was a human thing to the extent that it was capable of
binding king and peasant, priest and craftsman together in a common bond
of sympathy and understanding. It was, moreover, a culture which came to
a man at his work. The mason who carved ornaments of some chapel or
cathedral drew his inspiration from the same source of religious
tradition as the ploughman who sang as he worked in the field or the
minstrel who chanted a song in the evening. It was a part of the
environment in which every man lived. But the later Renaissance had no
sympathy with culture of this kind. It could not understand craft
culture. To it culture was primarily a matter of books. It became a
purely intellectual affair, whose standards were critical, and, as such,
instead of operating to bind the various classes of the community
together, it raised a barrier between the many and the few. There is no
escape from this state of things so long as culture remains on a purely
intellectual basis, for a time will never arrive when the majority in
any class are vitally interested in intellectual pursuits. Mediaeval
culture did not expect them to be. It accepted differences among men as
irrevocable, but it knew at the same time that all men had certain human
interests in common, and it built up a culture to preserve them.

In the place of a communal culture, the Renaissance promoted the cult of
the individual. Its history bristles with the names of brilliant men who
seem almost to be ends in themselves. They have all the appearance of
being great creators, but when we examine them more closely we see they
are the great destroyers. For their greatness is not their own. They
were men who inherited great traditions, which they thoughtlessly
destroyed, much in the same way as a spendthrift squanders the fortune
to which he succeeds. But while the Renaissance destroyed the great
traditions, it could put nothing in their place, for its facile
half-success left it ultimately impotent, and if we search for the final
cause of this failure, I think we shall find it in this---that it valued
means rather than ends. It concentrated its energy upon science and
criticism, but for what ends it knew not. These, it assumed, might be
left to take care of themselves. And so it remained without a rudder to
steer by or a goal at which to aim. Science and criticism may be
constructive, but only when used by men with well-defined ends in view.
But men of this type believe in dogmas, which the men of the Renaissance
did not. Such men realize that if criticism has any validity in society
it can only be on the assumption that it is in search of final and
definite conclusions; that if it seeks to destroy one set of dogmas it
does so in order to create others. But the men of the Renaissance did
not understand this. They valued criticism for the sake of criticism,
not for the sake of truth but for the love of destruction. They never
understood that the final object and justification of criticism is that
it destroys the need of criticism; that the final aim and object of free
thought should be the re-establishment of dogmas.

# The Reformation in Germany

Though the Reformation may be regarded at once as a development and a
reaction against the Renaissance, it had yet at the same time roots of
its own. Though it broke out in the sixteenth century in Germany, its
intellectual foundations were laid in the fourteenth century in England
by Wycliffe--"the Morning Star of the Reformation" as he is called. His
ideas were carried all over Europe by wandering scholars. He was the
inspirer of the Hussite Movement in Bohemia as well as of the leading
men in the Reformation.

Wycliffe was no Catholic, but a religious pervert. He had no conception
of the function of religion in its broadest and most catholic sense as
an instrument which maintained the common life by securing the
acceptance of certain beliefs and standards of thought and morals by the
whole people and thus maintaining the Kingdom of God upon Earth. On the
contrary, his attitude towards religion was a very narrow,
self-regarding and personal one. He was concerned with the need of a man
saving his own individual soul, and his teaching was a perversion of the
whole idea of Christianity. If we keep steadily in our mind that the
central aim of Christianity is to maintain the common life, it becomes
apparent that the primary object of the priest is the maintenance of a
common standard of thought and morals. A man by his words may secure
respect for them, though in his individual life he may fall short of
their fulfilment. But Wycliffe, viewing the corruption of the clergy of
his day, laid down the dictum that only a priest who is himself without
sin can preach the word of God. Though a corrupt clergy is to be
deplored, it becomes evident that the remedy of Wycliffe is worse than
the disease, in as much as it denies the humanity of the priest.
Insistence upon such a standard demands that a priest, instead of, as
heretofore, being acknowledged a sinner like other men, must be a
superior person. Thus he will, knowing himself to be a sinner, become a
hypocrite in the eyes of the world, or, what is far worse, he will
become a prig, committing the most deadly of all sins, that of spiritual
pride, and endeavour to make his own conduct the standard of truth and
morals.

This constituted the central heresy of Wycliffe. All the rest flowed
from it. Wycliffe himself was a prig of the first order; his
self-sufficiency was intolerable. It was the elect, he taught, who
constituted the community of saints---the community of God or the true
Church. According to him, the Church consisted of all true believers who
had access to the Divine mercy, who approached God by their own prayers
without the intervention of a priestly mediator, and who were to
interpret the Scriptures according to the dictates of their consciences.
For by making the Scriptures rather than the traditions of the Church
the final authority Wycliffe made personal opinion the final test of
truth. In other words, the Church consisted not of the hierarchy and the
people but of all the prigs and self-elected saints whose standard of
self-righteousness was henceforth to become the standard of conduct and
morals. Wycliffe was the first of the Puritans.

In the ordinary course of events, Wycliffe would have suffered death as
a heretic, but like all the self-righteous Puritanical crowd he had in
his composition a streak of worldly wisdom. He took care that his new
gospel would be acceptable to the hierarchy of the State if not to that
of the Church, and made his position safe by securing the protection of
John of Gaunt, whose personal conduct incidentally was anything but
pure. The corruption of the clergy, Wycliffe maintained, could be traced
to their excessive wealth. It was essential, therefore, to the promotion
of the higher life in the community that the clergy should be reduced.
Hence it was Wycliffe advised the confiscation of the Church lands by
the State. That the State itself was more corrupt than the Church, that
in the hands of the lawyers who were now controlling it the State had
become a shameless instrument of class oppression which was for its own
ends dispossessing the peasants of their lands, did not deter Wycliffe
from proposing a measure which would increase enormously the power which
was so unscrupulously used. Such larger issues did not interest him. As
to how the peasants were likely to fare under his new regime he never,
apparently, gave a moment's thought. He was not concerned with the
well-being of the people, but with the creation of a race of
self-righteous plaster saints to replace the hierarchy of the Church.

Such was the fundamental heresy of Wycliffe which bore fruit a
thousand-fold when the Reformation broke over Europe. Immediately, the
Reformation owed its inception to the protest of Luther against the
corruption of the Papacy which had come about as a consequence of the
revival of Pagan thought and morals. In the year 1510, Luther visited
Rome on business connected with his monastic order, and was deeply moved
at the irreligion and corruption of the Papal Court. Seven years after
this visit he took up a stand against the sale of Indulgences, by which
at the time Leo X was seeking to raise money for the completion of St.
Peter's at Rome, in the belief that the abuses attending their sale were
the main source of corruption. On the 1st of November, 1517, he nailed
to the doors of the Castle Church at Wittenberg his famous thesis of
ninety-five propositions against the sale of Indulgences. The nailing of
theses to the doors of churches was in the Middle Ages an ordinary
academic procedure, and according to the usage of the times the author
was not supposed to be definitely committed to the opinions he had
expressed. But it was apparent that Luther did not intend the debate to
be an ordinary academic one, for he had carefully chosen the day on
which to nail up his thesis. For the 1st of November was All Saints Day.
It was the anniversary of the consecration of the church and was
commemorated by a long series of service, while the benefits of an
Indulgence were secured for all who took part in them. It was the day
when the largest concourse of townsmen and strangers might be expected,
and would therefore ensure a wide reading of his thesis, nor was he
disappointed with the result. He had raised a question in which there
happened to be widespread interest. The printers could not produce
copies of this thesis fast enough to meet the demand which came from all
parts of Germany.

Now why was it that Luther's act had immediately such marvellous
practical results? The answer is because it had become widely recognized
that the abuse of Indulgences was a fruitful source of the corruption of
the ecclesiastical organization. It is impossible here properly to
discuss this question, not only because it is very involved, but because
the theory on which Indulgences rest is entirely unintelligible from a
purely rational or ethical standpoint. It may, however, be said that
Mediaeval theology did not create Indulgences; it only followed and
tried to justify the practices of the Popes and the Roman Curia. They
originated in the early days of the Church. Serious sins involved
separation from the fellowship of Christians, and readmission to the
communion was dependent not merely upon public confession but also on
the manifestation of a true repentance by the performance of certain
*satisfactions*, such as the manumission of slaves, prolonged fastings,
extensive almsgivings; which were works acceptable to God and gave
outward and visible proof that the penitent really desired to be
received again into the fold. In course of time public confessions
became private confessions to a priest, and there grew up a system of
penances proportionate to the sins. In the seventh century these, under
certain circumstances, became commuted for money payments, and so little
by little the inward meaning receded into the background while greater
importance became attached to the outward acts until, under the
direction of the Renaissance Popes, Indulgences had degenerated into
purely commercial transactions. They had been abused everywhere, but
particularly in Germany, for Germany during the Middle Ages was the
richest country in Europe and as such had become the usual resource of a
Pope in financial straits. So long as the sale of Indulgences was
limited and only made use of in exceptional circumstances, nobody
thought of objecting. But the authority of the Holy See had been
severely shaken by the Great Schism---for the spectacle of two, and at
one time three, Popes claiming the allegiance of Christendom, whilst
hurling anathemas at each other, was anything but an edifying one.
Moreover, the Popes of the Renaissance in their pursuit of temporal
power had to all intents and purposes become secular princes, using
religion merely as an instrument for the furtherance of their political
ambitions. These Popes greatly increased the sale of Indulgences and
raised tithes and annates under the pretext of war against the Turks,
though no expeditions were sent forth and the money collected was spent
upon other objects. When news of the corruption of the Papacy had been
noised abroad and the clergy of Germany found, as they asserted in a
petition presented to the Emperor-elect, Maximilian, in 1510, that the
Papacy could be restrained by no agreements or conventions seeing that
it granted dispensations, suspensions, and revocations for the vilest
persons while employing other devices for nullifying its promises and
evading its own wholesome regulations, a time came when numberless
people began to ask themselves whether the Papacy was entitled to the
allegiance that it claimed and in what sense the Popes were to be
considered the successors of St. Peter. All efforts at reform having
failed, the only remedy lay in revolution, and Germany was ready for the
signal. In 1521 the Nuncio Alexander wrote "that five years before he
had mentioned to Pope Leo his dread of a German uprising, he had heard
from many Germans that they were only waiting for some fool to open his
mouth against Rome."

The immediate popularity of Luther's protest, then, was not due to any
desire for doctrinal reform but because he stood for opposition to Rome.
The doctrinal changes associated with his name were largely improvised
dogmas called into existence by the desire to combat Papal pretensions,
for he was a man of action rather than a careful and logical thinker and
only stated an abstract position when he was driven to it. The original
idea of the Church had been that of salvation by faith and good works.
But when Christianity triumphed and everybody was born a Christian, the
faith came to be taken more or less for granted and emphasis was put
more and more upon good works, as being the mark of a good Christian
life. It was among other things the emphasis which had been almost
entirely placed upon good works that led to the abuse of Indulgences.
Luther attacked this external idea of Christianity. He had told an
assembly of clergy who met at Leitzkau in 1512 to discuss the reform of
the Church that reformation must begin with the individual and involved
a change of heart. The penitence which Christ required was something
more than a momentary expression of sorrow. Hence his cardinal dogma of
justification by faith. No Christian, I imagine, Catholic or Protestant,
would object to what he meant by this. For though he maintained that
good works were not sufficient, it is to be supposed that he meant
salvation by faith and good works. But he did not say this, and the
result was the Reformation produced results very different from what he
had intended. Under Protestantism, stress came to be laid entirely upon
questions of faith to the exclusion of good works, and morals
accommodated them selves to the practice of the rich. To understand
exactly why this came about we must consider the changes which Luther
introduced into Church government. Like his doctrinal changes, they had
their origin in political expediency.

The immediate success of Luther I said was due to the fact that he stood
for opposition to Rome. Of that there can be no doubt whatsoever. But a
question arises out of it that needs to be answered. If the Reformation,
so far as the majority were concerned, was inspired by opposition to
Rome, how was it that the movement did not take the form of a mere
separation of the Church from Rome as in the first place it did in
England? The answer is that the political condition of Germany made that
impossible. From the date when the revival of Roman Law led the Emperors
to attempt to control the Papacy, it had been the consistent policy of
Rome to cripple the Empire by encouraging the congeries of sovereign
princes to assert their independence against the Emperors. The result of
this policy was that the power of the Emperor was only nominal. In
reality it did not exist. Consequently in Germany there could be no
appeal from the authority of the Pope to the authority of State, but
only an appeal from the Pope to the people; that is, to the community of
believers. Hence it came about that when at the Diet of Worms (1521)
Luther maintained that Popes and Councils might err, in the absence of
the support of the Emperor he was in the position of having either to
retract or to appeal to the people. Having taken this step, certain
consequences logically followed from it. In appealing to the people he
not only made their authority supreme in matters of Church government,
but in the interpretation of the Scriptures; a development which was
made possible by the recent invention of printing. This was fatal for
the ends he had in view, because it entirely destroyed the value of
religion as a social force capable of binding men together, because if
each individual is to interpret the Scriptures, their meaning becomes a
matter of opinion, in the light of which every man is a law unto
himself. For if truth is declared to be subjective, it is impossible to
insist upon a moral standard which is necessarily objective. Luther was
not long in finding these things out, though he would never admit to
himself that he could possibly be wrong. The doubts and qualms of
conscience which in later life he had with regard to the correctness of
his course of action he ascribed to the suggestion of the evil spirit.
Often at the beginning of his crusade Luther had expressed the confident
expectation that his gospel would exercise a beneficent influence both
morally and religiously. But he was terribly disappointed. It was not
long before he was driven to acknowledge that things had grown seven
times worse than before. "People," he said, "after hearing the Gospel
steal, lie, drink, gluttonize, and indulge in all sorts of vice.
Drunkenness has come upon us like a flood and swamped everything."He
deplored, too, the growing insubordination especially of the rising
generation, but his words fell upon deaf ears. Writing of the change
which followed the transfer of authority from the hands of the priests
to those of the laity, Erasmus said: "The people will not listen to
their own ministers when the latter do not tickle their ears; on the
contrary, these unhappy preachers must straight-way be sent about their
business the moment that they show any frankness, and presume to
question the conduct of their hearers." In a letter to Luther in 1524 he
wrote: "I see that these innovations are producing shoals of turbulent
good-for-nothing people, and I dread a bloody insurrection."

The trouble then, I incline to think, was very much like the trouble at
the present day. Everybody wanted reform, but they had no intention of
changing their own lives. They would support Luther to get rid of the
incubus of Rome, but that was as far as they desired to go, for they had
no really religious feeling. Germany had become corrupted by wealth, and
as a matter of fact so far as Germany was concerned it was much truer to
say that the people had corrupted the Church than that the Church had
corrupted the people, for the Humanist Movement in Germany which owed
its inception to the ecclesiastical reformer Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa
never became as corruptly Pagan as in Italy, but had addressed itself to
the higher emotions and had sought to train the conscience of the
individual to recognize his direct responsibility to God and his
fellows. On the other hand, the corruption in Germany was of secular
origin and had come about as a result of the sinister influence of Roman
Law reacting upon the growth and development of commerce. At the
beginning of the sixteenth century Germany was the most prosperous
country in Europe. It was the great universal centre of commerce, the
great market for the products of nature and art. This was to be
accounted for, firstly by its central geographical position, which in
the days of the overland trade routes placed it in a position to trade
with Italy and the Levant on the one side and with Flanders, the
Scandinavian North, Poland and Russia on the other; and secondly by the
enterprising character of its merchants, who knew how to use their
favourable position to the utmost advantage. In the early Middle Ages
they had been averse to the business of usury and had devoted themselves
exclusively to mercantile affairs. The Merchant Guilds of the German
towns had organized themselves into the famous Hanseatic League,which
had settlements in the principal ports of the countries with which they
traded. The one in London known as the Steelyardwas surrounded by high
walls after the manner of a fortress. It was required that all who lived
within its walls---masters, assistants and apprentices---should be
unmarried men, for they followed a life of strict discipline which was
monastic in its character. It was upon this monastic basis that the
broad foundations of German trade were laid in the early Middle Ages.
The adventurous and dangerous calling of the merchant in those days
fostered in them a simple and humble piety which expressed itself in a
diligent attendance on the services of the Church and in the foundation
of benevolent institutions of every kind. It was because of such things
that the merchant of those early days was not looked upon askance. It
was believed that the merchant who engaged in active trade and visited
distant markets was rendering a service to the community, and it was
considered that he was entitled to some gain for the undoubted risks he
was running. But this old-time sense of responsibility was gradually
undermined by the lawyers, whose teaching regarding wealth corrupted the
merchants; little by little the early monastic discipline was broken
down and the merchants became avaricious and corrupt. The trading
corporations which had originally come into existence as a means of
affording mutual protection for their members in foreign parts, for the
assurance of exchange, the settling of questions of justice, taxation,
and coinage, and had recognized definite responsibilities towards
society, began to think of nothing else except of how to secure
advantages for themselves. They became corrupt monopolies which no
longer observed Guild regulations. They kept up an artificial dearness
in all necessary commodities, adulterated articles of food and clothing,
suppressed small industries, paid low rates of wages, and forced down
the prices of agricultural produce to such an extent that all through
the fifteenth century there were frequent risings of the peasants
against their tyranny and oppression. All these evils were allowed to
grow unhindered because the traders played into the hands of the great
personages either by lending them money or borrowing it from them to
speculate with.

Now why did the nobility become a party to these iniquities? The usual
Socialist answer would be, of course, that all classes exist for the
purposes of exploitation, and therefore it is but natural that they
should join with the merchants to exploit the peasants. This, however,
is not historically true. The Feudal class, as I showed in an earlier
chapter, had a dual origin, and half of it at least, probably
three-quarters of it, came into existence to perform a function. Their
change from protectors of communal rights to exploiters was ultimately
due to the corrupting influence of Roman Law, but immediately it was due
to the desire to "keep their end up" in a competition of luxury and
display as against the merchants. Many of the latter had grown to be
richer than kings and emperors, and vanity had prompted them to give
visible evidence of their great riches in the adoption of a higher and
higher standard of living. Feasting and gambling became the order of the
day, while they became very extravagant in dress. Men and women were
alike in this respect, though the wives and daughters of the merchants
were the most extravagant. Fashions changed constantly and took the form
of dressing in the costumes of other countries, of big sleeves and
little sleeves and all the other foibles with which we are familiar.
Many people saw the dangers in these innovations, and attempts were made
to put a boundary to the growth of extravagance by the enactments of
sumptuary laws. In the year 1485 the Council of Ratisbon made the
following rules with regard to dress which are interesting as showing
the moderate demands of reformers. "The distinguished wives and
daughters of burghers shall be allowed eight dresses, six long cloaks,
three dancing dresses, and one plaited mantle having three sets of
sleeves, of velvet, brocade and silk: two pearl hair bands not costing
more than twelve florins, a tiara of gold and pearls worth five florins,
not more than three veils costing eight florins each, a clasp not having
more than one ounce of gold, silk fringes to their dresses, but not gold
or pearl; a pearl necklace not costing more than five florins, a pearl
stomacher worth twelve florins, two rows of pearl round the sleeve at
five florins per ounce, a gold chain and pendant worth fifteen florins
and a necklace of twenty florins. Except for the engagement or wedding
ring, none were permitted to cost more than twenty-four florins. Three
or four rosaries were allowed, but they were not to cost more than ten
florins; sashes of silk and embroidery worth three florins."Few people
would say that there was anything very Puritanical about such a law,
though no doubt it would seem so to many women of the day who were said
to wear at one time clothing worth three or four hundred florins while
they had in their wardrobes adornments costing more than three or four
thousand florins.

I said that many people saw the dangers of such extravagance.
Wimpheling, who was one of the most widely read authors of his day,
writing on the great commercial prosperity of Germany, which he pointed
out she owed to the untiring industry and the energy of her citizens,
artisans as well as merchants, showed the reverse of the medal adding
"wealth and prosperity are attended with great dangers, as we see
exemplified; they induce extravagance in dress, in banqueting, and what
is still worse, they engender a desire for still more. This desire
debases the mind of man, and degenerates into contempt of God, His
Church and His Commandments. These evils are to be perceived in all
classes; luxury has crept in among the clergy, particularly among those
who are of noble birth; they have no real love for souls and they try to
equal the rich merchants in their mode of living."

Wimpheling saw, as men in all ages have seen, that luxury leads to
social catastrophe. The peril arises from the fact that it is no longer
the wise but the wealthy who set the social standards, and a kind of
social compulsion is brought to bear upon others to live up to it
whether they can afford to do so or not. As only the very rich can
afford to go the pace, a point is soon reached when the need of money is
very widely felt. When in Germany that point was reached, nobody wanted
to do any really productive work, but everybody wanted to go into trade
where money was to be made. Mercantile houses, shops and taverns
multiplied inordinately, and complaints were everywhere made that there
was no money but only debts and that all districts and towns were
drained by usury. Then there happened in Germany what is happening
to-day. Each class attempted to save itself from bankruptcy by
transferring its burdens on to the shoulder of the class beneath it, and
it was then there arose in Germany a bitter enmity between the
propertied and unpropertied classes. While the working class were
advancing towards pauperism, the general rancour and class hatred
increased in intensity as the wealthy more and more indulged in
ostentation and display.

Such was the social condition of Germany on the eve of the Peasants War
which broke out in the year 1524. It is apparent that had Luther and his
followers never appeared on the scenes the spirit of discontent and
class hatred which was growing everywhere and which had been fermenting
since the beginning of the fifteenth century would have produced tumults
and seditions in the towns and provinces of Germany. But it was the
special condition of things brought about by the evangelical preaching
of Luther which hastened the crisis and gave to the Peasants' War its
characteristics of universality and inhuman atrocity. Immediately it was
a movement to restore the old communal system of land-holding which had
been destroyed by the inroads of Roman Law, and was of a purely agrarian
character. The demands of the peasants were moderate and bore few of the
traces of the intellectual and physical violence which marked its later
course. They demanded the restoration of their old *Haingerichte* and
other courts, the restoration of common lands and old rights, the
abolition of new exactions of rents and services, and freedom of water,
forest and pasture. The revolt commenced with local risings of peasants
in the south-west. But when once it had started, it gathered momentum
quickly. It was joined first by one and then by another revolutionary
current until it united in one stream all elements of disaffection and
threatened to inundate the whole of Germany. It convulsed almost every
corner of the Empire from the Alps to the Baltic. Bavaria alone was
unaffected, and this is attributed to the fact that the Bavarian
Government had offered strenuous resistance to religious innovations.

As the rebellion extended its area, it assimilated ideas distinct from
the agrarian grievances which had prompted it. The communist spirit was
rampant in the cultivated town circles, and its effect was to give a
religious aspect to the revolt. "The age of Christian liberty and
brotherhood had come," it was said, "and one class ought to be as rich
as another." It is not improbable that the religious element came to
predominate because it offered a convenient banner under which sectional
interests might unite. While the merchants blamed the clergy for the
troubles, the nobility blamed the rich merchants, and so it came about
that in the early stages of the revolt the rich middle class gave some
support to the peasants. Waldshut and Memmingen were friendly, while
Zurich, Strasbourg, Nuremberg and Ulm rendered active assistance. Though
the bulk of the insurgents were peasants, they received others into
their ranks, and along with priests, barons and ex-officials there came
men of criminal tendencies, who are always ready to join any
revolutionary movement because of the prospect of loot it offers. As
generally happens in popular risings, these baser elements got entirely
out of hand and by their excesses brought odium upon the whole movement.
They brought about the reaction in which the middle class element made
common cause with the nobles in suppressing the revolt. Luther, who in
the early days of the rising had written a pamphlet in which he
deprecates the use of violence, though admitting that the demands of the
peasants were just, now became genuinely terrified at the size of the
revolt and wrote a second pamphlet in which he urged the princes to kill
and slay the peasants without mercy. The princes took him at his word.
After lasting two years the revolt was put down with unheard-of cruelty.
According to the Emperor Charles V, a hundred thousand people were
killed on both sides.

From whatever point of view Luther's action is examined it remains
indefensible. His first pamphlet might be defended on the grounds that
it was consistent with his former attitude inasmuch as he had always
taught the efficacy of the word and had repudiated appeal to the sword.
But there can be no excuse whatsoever for his second one, for he must
have known that the tide had begun to turn when he wrote it and that the
princes needed no urging to be merciless. From being a national hero
Luther sank to the level of the leader of a sect, and a sect that
depended for its existence on the support of political and financial
interests. Henceforth Lutheran divines leaned upon the territorial
princes and repaid their support with undue servility. When the princes
began to suppress the monasteries and to seize the Church lands, Luther
appears to have been taken entirely by surprise. He deplored and
censured the selfishness of the princes, but he was powerless to prevent
it. By condemning the rising, Luther had alienated for ever the sympathy
of the peasants. His action settled the future of Protestantism by
identifying it entirely with vested interests. It is as supplying a
version of Christianity acceptable to capitalists that the subsequent
history of Lutheranism interests us and is to be studied.

The appeal of Luther against the authority of the Pope had been to the
traditions of the Early Church. Those traditions were communist, and it
was because the early Christians despised wealth that they could
approach God without the intervention of a priestly mediator and without
the likelihood of abusing the privilege. But when Luther alienated the
peasants, he separated his gospel from any possible communist base and
identified it with a class whose traditions were not only extremely
individualistic but had an inordinate love of wealth, and this made a
great difference. For the merchants and shopkeepers who now supported
him were not the kind of people who could be relied upon to interpret
Christian ideas to any but their own advantage. They came to support
Luther, not because they had any intention of living up to the ideals of
the early Christians, but because they resented supervision and for long
had chafed under a religion which taught that the pursuit of wealth for
wealth's sake was an ignoble and degrading thing, however far its
priests fell short of its ideal. So they welcomed a gospel which removed
such supervision and made them answerable only to their own consciences,
from which they had little to fear. Luther might have denounced
merchants as usurers and lawyers as robbers, but Luther's supporters
were not thin-skinned people. They saw that the principle of an elective
priesthood subject to the control of the laity was a valuable one for
the ends they had in view and that organized on such a basis the
priesthood would soon have to do their bidding. Hence it was that the
Protestant Churches speedily came to accommodate morals to the practice
of the rich. The Scriptures might be studied but not such parts as
denounced the wealthy. On the contrary, immorality became synonymous
with sexual immorality, swearing and drunkenness---vices to which they
were not particularly prone---while avarice, the one sin towards which
they were powerfully drawn, the new religion was careful not to forbid.
The change of attitude towards usury is not the least of the triumphs of
the Reformation. The history of the change is interesting, considering
that Luther's first attitude towards the problems it presented was to
revert to earlier and more rigid standards than were current in his day.

The Early Church had condemned usury in all forms absolutely as immoral.
But this strict view was modified somewhat by later moralists and
economists, who came to realize that to forbid the taking of interest,
under all circumstances, was not expedient, inasmuch as it led to
serious public inconvenience. Hence the question which agitated the
minds of moralists and economists in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and
fifteenth centuries was to determine what was and what was not
legitimate. Starting from the principle of Aristotle that money itself
cannot beget money, the Mediaeval moralists were puzzled as to how to
justify the taking of interest. They were agreed that to seek to
increase wealth in order to live on the labour of others was wrong, and
to this extent the issue with them was a purely moral issue. But, on the
other hand, there was the question of public convenience, as in the case
of travellers who would have to carry large sums of money about with
them in the absence of bills of exchange, or the question of risk
involved in a loan. To all such difficult and perplexing problems the
Mediaeval moralists addressed themselves, not for theoretical but for
practical reasons. For as commerce tended to increase, it became urgent
to hammer out some principle whereby the necessities of trade could be
related to some definite moral standard.

To the end the problem evaded them. In principle all were against usury,
but public convenience demanded that exception be made under certain
circumstances. These exceptions grew and grew in number, but no sure
principle was forthcoming, and I am left to wonder whether the failure
of the Mediaeval moralists and economists to find an answer to the
problems which usury presented may not have been due to the fact that
the problem is only partly a moral one. The difficulties in which they
found themselves in their attempts to justify the taking of interest in
certain cases in order that public convenience might not suffer arose
because the function which the usurer performed in such cases was
essentially a public one, and should have been undertaken by men in some
corporate capacity, and not left to the initiative of individuals. The
Franciscans appear to have come to some such conclusion, for they
founded the *montes pietatis* or lending houses, which advanced loans to
poor people either without interest or at a very low rate, and thus
prevented many from falling into the hands of usurers.

In so far as the problem was a moral one, perhaps St. Antoninogave such
answers as were to be given. St. Antonino was an Archbishop of Florence
in the fourteenth century, and was therefore well placed for one who
wished for information. He was a representative man, and to be
acquainted with him is to be acquainted with the thought of his
generation, for he had read widely and formed judgments on many of the
vexed economic problems of his day. What is more important, his
judgments were of a very practical nature, for he was constantly
referred to by the bankers and merchants of Florence to give decisions
on delicate points affecting the morality of trade. This fact alone is
worth recording, and should be of particular interest to Marxians who
believe that no other motive but exploitation has ever existed in trade,
more especially when they learn that St. Antonino anticipated Marx
himself in affirming that all value depends upon labour, whether of hand
or head.

Though in the early days of the Reformation the reformers were even more
opposed to any compromise with usury than the Catholic theologians, the
influence of the Reformation brought a breach with Mediaeval doctrine in
the latter half of the sixteenth century. Calvin objected to the idea of
regarding money as barren when it was possible to purchase with it
property from which a revenue could be obtained. Calvin's attitude may
therefore justly be regarded as the turning-point. It had certainly much
influence in weakening the old repugnance towards usury. But Calvin did
not allow the taking of interest under any circumstances. This is
evident from Calvin's own words:--

"Although I do not visit usuries (payment for the use of money) with
wholesale condemnation, I cannot give them my indiscriminate
approbation, nor, indeed, do I approve that any one should make a
business of money-lending. Usury for money may lawfully be taken only
under the following conditions, and not otherwise." Among these
conditions are "That usury should not be demanded from men in need; nor
is it lawful to force any man to pay usury who is oppressed by need or
calamity," and "he who receives a loan on usury should make at least as
much for himself by his labour and care as he obtains who gives the
loan."

"What Calvin feared took place. In after centuries Calvin's great
authority was invoked for the wide proposition that to take reward for
the loan of money was never sinful; and a couple of his sentences were
taken from their context and quoted without regard to the conditions by
which they were limited. His carefully qualified approval of the claim
for usury when it was made by one business man on another was wrested
into an approval of every sort of contract concerning the loan of
money."

What happened with regard to usury happened also in respect to the
institution of property. The communist theory and practice of the Church
had been abandoned and the Church came to recognize the institution of
private property. It was to be regarded as an evil due to the Fall, and
become a necessity, because of the presence of sin in the world. Still
the Church did not regard possession as absolute but as conditional, and
dependent upon the fulfilment of certain duties. Such as failed in their
duties might be called upon to surrender it. They had no legal or moral
claim. "Private property and common use"--the formula which Aquinas
borrowed from Aristotle---became the official attitude of the Church.
The Roman lawyers sought to reintroduce into society the old Pagan idea
of absolute property rights in the interests of the territorial princes.
But the Church would have none of it, and did all in its power to resist
the encroachments of the Roman Code. The Reformation changed all this by
removing opposition to the inroads of Roman Law. The rights of property,
from being objective and dependent upon the fulfilment of duties, became
subjective and absolute. Luther, who had denounced Roman Law, came to
profess the most restrictive views on property; while Melanchthon went
much further, affirming that property existed by Divine right, and that
to limit it in any way would be contrary to the teachings of Jesus
Christ and the Apostles.

In the face of such evidence, it is impossible to maintain the popular
notion that the Reformation was a triumph of democracy. So far from this
being true, the Reformation was in reality the triumph of the State,
landlordism and capitalism over the Church and the people, and this
tendency was present from the very start. The story which has been so
sedulously promoted in order to give the Reformation a democratic
flavour, that Wycliffe, its "morning star," was one of the instigators
of the Peasants Revolt, is absolutely without any foundation in fact.
Considering that John of Gaunt---whom the peasants associated with the
lawyers as the cause of their oppression---was Wycliffe's best friend
and protector, it is foolish to connect his name with the revolt.
Moreover, there is nothing in Wycliffe's writings to suggest that he
favoured insurrection. Wycliffe desired to maintain the system of the
State precisely as it then was, while he regarded the growing power of
the Church as the menace, and it was to that he was opposed. On the
contrary, it was the Friars who organized the revolt. If not officially,
at any rate, unofficially; for not a few of them actually took part in
the revolt, leading some of the bands of peasants who marched to London.
Anyway, suspicion fell upon them, and it may have been one of the
reasons why, when the Reformation burst forth, the monasteries were
suppressed.

# The Suppression of the English Monasteries

The great difference between the course of the Reformation in England
and in Germany is to be found in the fact that whereas in Germany the
Reformation was primarily a religious and popular movement with certain
political and economic complications or consequences, in England the
religious movement was artificially promoted to bolster up the political
and economic changes initiated entirely by the Crown. For though
Wycliffe's gospel had been warmly espoused on the Continent by Huss,
Jerome and Luther, his influence in England appears to have come to an
end with the suppression of the Lollards in the reign of Richard II, and
at the time when Henry VIII began to suppress the monasteries there was
not in existence any popular movement demanding change. It is
significant that no serious change was made in the doctrine, worship or
ceremonials of the Church until sixteen years after Henry VIII had
repudiated Papal authority. Though Henry at one time had given the
Protestant Princes of Germany great hopes of a religious union against
both Pope and Emperor, nothing came of it. It was clearly a piece of
bluff intended to ward off a possible attack by the Emperor. For Henry
had no sympathy with Protestantism. Not only had he opposed it and
received from the Pope as a reward for a book he had written in defence
of the Catholic Faith the title of "Defender of the Faith" (a title
which English sovereigns still use, it being popularly supposed that the
Faith referred to is Protestantism and not Catholicism, as is actually
the case) but he had actually gone so far as to burn as heretics men who
preached Protestant doctrine.

However much room there may be for differences of opinion as to the
motives which led Pope Clement VII to refuse to sanction the divorce of
Henry VIII from Catherine of Aragon, there can be no doubt whatsoever
that the repudiation of Papal authority by Henry which prepared the way
for the Reformation in England and immediately led to the suppression of
the monasteries was due to the fact that Henry entertained a passionate
desire to marry Anne Boleyn and was determined that nothing should stand
in his way. As to why he did so desire, there is again a difference of
opinion. The most generous explanation is that Henry wanted a son, and
remembering that the Wars of the Roses had resulted in the death of all
possible male successors to the throne, and that while he had three sons
and two daughters by Catherine only one daughter had survived, it was
not an altogether unnatural desire. But such an explanation is difficult
to reconcile with the facts as we know them. It might be argued that the
desire for a son impelled Henry to seek a divorce if his matrimonial
adventures had come to an end when he married Anne Boleyn, but the
evidence in this case is strong that lust was his ruling passion, for
when within a twelve-month he had grown tired of her he said he had been
induced to marry her by witchcraft, which strongly suggests he was at
the mercy of his lusts. The fact that Henry's life became a succession
of marriages, divorces and beheadings suggests that he was possessed of
a mania which is equally difficult to reconcile with the natural desire
for a son or the mere pursuit of lust. It should not be forgotten,
moreover, that when he married Jane Seymour he procured a clause in the
Succession Act enabling him in the event of failure of issue to dispose
of the Crown by will; it being understood at the time that this
concession was made in favour of his illegitimate son the Duke of
Richmond, who died shortly afterwards. If the only object of Henry's
marriages was to secure the succession it may be asked why, if it was
possible for him to secure this concession after he married Jane
Seymour, he could not have done it while he was married to Catherine of
Aragon. The grounds on which he sought to obtain a divorce from her,
that he feared he had been living in sin with her because she had been
formally married to his brother Prince Arthur, who had died before the
marriage was consummated, will scarcely acquit a man whose subsequent
life proved him to be indifferent to sin.

Whatever the truth may be as to the secret motives of Henry, there can
be no doubt whatsoever as to the consequences of his actions, for the
whole subsequent history of England turns on his marriage with Anne
Boleyn. Having determined to marry her, and after six fruitless years
being unable to persuade the Pope to take any steps towards the granting
of a divorce, he resolved to overthrow the power of the Pope in England
by making himself the head of the English Church. In this task he was
aided and abetted by the perfidious and cold-blooded Thomas Cranmer,
whom he immediately afterwards made Archbishop of Canterbury, and who
speedily granted Henry the divorce he desired. By becoming a party to
this disreputable business Cranmer put himself entirely into Henry's
power and henceforth had to do his bidding, to perish at last amid those
flames which he himself had been the chief means of kindling. All who
refused to acknowledge the king's supremacy in spiritual affairs Henry
mercilessly sacrificed. Sir Thomas More and John Fisher, Bishop of
Rochester, with many others were executed for refusing. The executions
filled the world with horror both at home and abroad. The Emperor
Charles V is said to have declared that he would rather have lost the
best city in his dominions than such a councillor as Sir Thomas More.
Yet in spite of all Henry won through. His success is to be attributed
in the first place to the fact that he found himself in an extraordinary
strong position owing to the centralizing process which had been going
on ever since the reign of Henry II and had concentrated in his hands
more powers than any other king of England enjoyed either before or
since, and in the next to the fact that Henry was a man of remarkable
ability while he was entirely unscrupulous. The old nobility, who alone
might have offered resistance to his policy, had been for the most part
destroyed in the Wars of the Roses, while such as were left were no
match for him in intelligence. They were superseded in the end by a new
nobility which Henry raised out of the commercial middle class---a class
of sycophants who enriched themselves by continual peculation. It was
thus that covetousness and fraud came to reign in high places, and the
tradition was established which identified the governing class with
exploitation.

It is possible that the monasteries would not have been suppressed had
not resistance to Henry been offered by the Franciscans who maintained
the Pope's authority. Henry now found himself in the position of having
either to abandon his policy of making himself supreme in spiritual
affairs or of suppressing the whole Order, which he did not hesitate to
do. It now became apparent that sweeping confiscations of monastic lands
were to be made. The princes of Germany had shown him the way, and he
was not slow to learn their lesson. Doubtless many of Henry's
councillors and courtiers who were hoping to share in the plunder were
by no means averse to such measures, for the Reformation could not have
proceeded apart from the concurrence of Parliament. But this could not
be said of Parliament as a whole. For the Act of 1536, which transferred
the property of the smaller monasteries, three hundred and seventy-six
in number, to the King and his heirs, stuck long in the Lower House and
was not passed until Henry threatened to have some of their heads.

The agent to whom Henry entrusted the work of suppressing the
monasteries was Thomas Cromwell. He had been an underling in the service
of Cardinal Wolsey. After a roving youth spent in Italy and elsewhere he
had risen by his wits, recommending himself to Henry by his sycophancy
and by his treachery to his old master. He maintained his position by
utter obsequiousness, and there was no kind of cruelty or tyranny of
which he declined to be the agent. Yet he was a man of cultivated
tastes, with a wide acquaintance of Italian literature. He had seen
Machiavelli's great work in manuscript, and from it had derived the
principles that guided him throughout his infamous career. He was
emphatically a man of the Renaissance; that strange combination of taste
and rascality which it was so successful in producing. Henry made him a
peer, and appointed him Royal Vice-regent and Vicar-General. In this
capacity he took first place in all meetings of the clergy, sitting even
before the Archbishop of Canterbury. The procedure adopted in the
suppressions was first to set on foot a visitation of the monasteries.
In this work Cromwell was assisted by deputies who were as villainous as
himself. They prepared reports full of false accusations in order to
find pretences for confiscating monastic property. They menaced those
who objected with charges of high treason. Subsequent visitors appointed
by Henry from among the country gentry sent in formal reports distinctly
contradicting many of the facts alleged by Cromwell's agents. But such
protests were of no avail. Henry was out for plunder, and as Cobbett
rightly observes in this connection, "when men have power to commit and
are resolved to commit acts of injustice, they are never at a loss for
pretences."The monastic orders were never heard in their defence. There
was no charge against any particular monastery or convent; the charges
were loose and general, and levelled against all whose revenues did not
exceed a certain sum. "This alone," observes Cobbett, "was sufficient to
show that the charges were false; for who will believe that the alleged
wickedness extended to all whose revenues did not exceed a certain sum,
and that when those revenues got above that point the wickedness
stopped?"

It is clear that the reason for stopping the confiscations at the point
where the revenues did not exceed a certain sum was that the public had
to be brought into line before any seizure of the great monasteries
could be safely attempted. The weak were first attacked, but means were
soon found for attacking the remainder. Great promises were held out
that the King, when in possession of these estates, would never more
want taxes from the people. "Henry employed preachers and ministers who
went about to preach and persuade the people that he could employ the
ecclesiastical revenues in hospitals, colleges and other foundations for
the public good, which would be a much better use than that they should
support lazy and useless monks."It is possible, of course, that Henry
may have thought that he would be able to fulfil these promises; but he
soon found out that he would not be able to keep the plunder for
himself, and that the nobles and gentry could only be persuaded to allow
him to continue his dastardly work on condition that he agreed to share
the spoil with them. They so beset him that he had not a moment's peace.
After four years he found himself no better off than he was before he
confiscated a single convent. "When complaining to Cromwell of the
rapacity of the applicants for grants he exclaimed:"By Our Lady! the
cormorants, when they have got the garbage, will devour the dish."
Cromwell reminded him that there was much more yet to come. "Tut, man,"
said the King, my whole realm would not staunch their maws."And thus it
was that from confiscating the property of the smaller monasteries he
went on to seize that of the larger ones, for there was no stopping
half-way once he had begun. Where opposition was encountered, Cromwell
and his ruffian visitors procured the murder of the parties under
pretence of their having committed high treason. Here and there the
people rose in rebellion against the devastations. But the local
outbreaks came to nothing, since as nearly every one of any consequence
was sharing in the plunder the people were deprived of their natural
leaders.

During the Middle Ages, England had been the most prosperous and
happiest country in Europe, perhaps the happiest country at any time in
history. These monasteries were wealthy and full of things of gold and
silver; and society was so well ordered that these things remained
untouched, though there was no standing army or police. But Cromwell and
his ruffians stripped them bare of all such things. The only parallel
which history affords of such a rich harvest of plunder is that of the
conquest of Peru, during which Cortes and Pizarro stripped the temples
bare of their gold and silver linings.

"The ruffians of Cromwell entered the convents; they tore down the
altars to get away the gold and silver, ran sacked the chests and
drawers of the monks and nuns, tore off the covers of the books that
were ornamented with the precious metals. These books were all in
manuscript. Single books that had taken half a long lifetime to compose
and to copy out fair; whole libraries, the getting of which together had
taken ages and ages and had cost immense sums of money, were scattered
abroad by these hellish ruffians when they had robbed the covers of
their rich ornaments. The ready money in the convents, down to the last
shilling, was seized."

Among the libraries so destroyed was that of St. Albans Abbey, which was
the greatest library in England. But the destruction of libraries at the
Reformation was not confined to those of the monasteries. The original
Guildhall Library, founded by Whittington and Carpenter, was destroyed,
as were also the Library at St. Paul's Cathedral and the predecessor of
the Bodleian Library at Oxford. About the year 1440, Humphrey, Duke of
Gloucester, "gave to the University of Oxford a library containing 600
volumes, only 120 of which were valued at more than a hundred thou sand
pounds. These books are called *Novi Tractatus*, or New Treatises, in
the University register, and said to be *admirandi apparatus*. They were
the most splendid and costly copies that could be procured, finely
written on vellum, and elegantly embellished with miniatures and
illuminations. Among the rest was a translation into French of Ovid's
*Metamorphoses*. Only a single specimen of these valuable volumes was
suffered to remain; it is a beautiful MS. in folio of Valerius Maximus,
enriched with the most elegant decorations, and written in Duke
Humphrey's age, evidently with a design of being placed in this
sumptuous collection. All the rest of the books, which, like this, being
highly ornamented, looked like missals, and conveyed ideas of Popish
superstition, were destroyed or removed by the pious visitors of the
University in the reign of Edward VI, whose zeal was only equalled by
their avarice.\"Any thing which was decorated apparently ranked then as
Popish superstition, which was a convenient cloak for the pursuit of
plunder.

After the monasteries were plundered, sacked and gutted, they were rased
to the ground, and in most cases gunpowder was employed in order to get
through the job quickly. For in granting these estates, it was in most
cases stipulated that they should be destroyed. The reason may be easily
understood. These wonderful Gothic buildings could not be allowed to
stand, for their continued existence would have been a constant reminder
to the people that these estates had been plundered, while their
destruction deprived them of all hope of the old order ever being
restored. The loss of these splendid buildings, where formerly rich and
poor received hospitality on their travels, brought a feeling of sadness
to the countryside, particularly in solitary and mountainous
districts---a sadness which was not diminished when the manor-houses of
Elizabeth and James I were built out of their ruins. The only comfort
there is in this terrible story is the knowledge that Cromwell, after he
had plundered, pillaged and devastated England, was sent to the block by
Henry, who had then no further use for him. But Henry, the chief
instigator of these crimes, got off scot-free.

It has often been urged that the monastic orders could not have occupied
the same place in the popular affections as they had done at an earlier
date, or Henry would not have found it possible to suppress them. The
answer is that on a straight issue they could never have been
suppressed. The people would everywhere have risen in their defence. But
Henry was too cunning to create such an issue. He allowed important
people to share in the plunder, disarmed opposition by promises of
putting their funds to a better use, and quelled rebellions by making
promises that he had never any intention of fulfilling. Thus by trickery
he prevented united action being taken against him. The suppression of
the monasteries was for the people a loss of the first magnitude, as the
following interesting picture of monastic estates at the time bears
witness:--

"There was no person that came to them heavy or sad for any cause that
went away comfortless; they never revenged them of any injury, but were
content to forgive it freely upon submission, and if the price of corn
had begun to start up in the market they made thereunto with wain load
of corn, and sold it under the market to poor people, to the end to
bring down the price thereof. If the highways, bridges, or causeways
were tedious to the passengers that sought their living by their travel,
their great help lacked not towards the repairing and amending
thereof---yea, often times they amended them on their own proper
charges.

"If any poor householder lacked seed to sow his land, or bread, corn, or
malt before harvest, and came to a monastery either of men or women, he
should not have gone away without help; for he should have had it until
harvest, that he might easily have paid it again. Yea, if he had made
his moan for an ox, horse, or cow, he might have had it upon his credit,
and such was the good conscience of the borrowers in those days that the
thing borrowed needed not to have been asked at the day of payment.

"They never raised their rent, or took any income or garsomes (fines) of
their tenants, nor ever broke in or improved any commons, although the
most part and the greatest waste grounds belonged to their possessions.

"If any poor people had made their moan at the day of marriage to any
abbey, they should have had money given to their great help. And thus
all sorts of people were helped and succoured by abbeys; yea, happy was
that person that was tenant to an abbey, for it was a rare thing to hear
that any tenant was removed by taking his farm over his head, nor he was
not afraid of any re-entry for non-payment of rent, if necessity drove
him there onto. And thus they fulfilled the works of charity in all the
country round about them, to the good example of all lay persons that
now have taken forth other lessons, that is, *nunc tempus olios postulat
mores*.\"

When these estates passed into the hands of the land lords they speedily
raised the rents and enclosed the commons. In other cases the peasantry
were simply turned out of their holdings in order that sheep-farming
might be substituted for tillage. "It seems," observes Cunningham, "that
the lords had the peasantry entirely in their own power, and that, since
they were technically liable for incidents of the nominal servitude,
into which they had returned since the failure of 1381, their lands were
forfeited in law if not in equity."It may be said that these changes
created the problem of poverty. For though there was some poverty in the
Middle Ages, the monasteries must on the whole have relieved it, for one
of the charges brought against them is that they were too indiscriminate
in their charity and that many beggars had become dependent on them. It
is not necessary to deny the truth of such statements, but to point out
that if the monasteries supported beggars they were created by the
landlords who, with the help of the Roman lawyers, had dispossessed the
peasants and turned them adrift because sheep-farming was more
profitable than tillage. Are the monasteries to be condemned for having
succoured those whom the landlords had rendered homeless? After the
suppression, the poor were deprived at one fell swoop of alms, shelter
and schooling. The consequence was that great numbers, left entirely
destitute of the means of existence, took to begging and thieving. Henry
VIII is said to have put 72,000 thieves to death. Elizabeth complained
bitterly that she could not get the laws enforced against them. Such was
the degree of beggary, of vagabondage, and of thievishness and robbery,
that she resorted particularly in London and its neighbourhood to
martial law.\" But it was all of no avail. The people had been rendered
destitute, and there were only two possible policies for dealing with
them if economic injustices were to be maintained---extermination or
legal pauperism. Shrinking from the former, resort at last was made to
the latter, and some general permanent and solid provision was made for
them. In the forty-third year of her reign there was passed the measure
which we know to-day as the Elizabethan Poor Law, from which our Poor
Law derives.

It was not only in the realm of charity and hospitality that the
monasteries were missed. It was customary for them to maintain highways
and dykes, to build bridges and seawalls and other such things for the
commonwealth. Many arts that had been brought to a high state of
perfection in the monasteries were paralysed or migrated to the towns.
Sculpture, embroidery, clock-making and bell-founding were almost
entirely monastic arts. The monks had been the chroniclers and
transcribers of manuscripts in the Middle Ages, and were among the first
to set up printing presses. It is true that monasticism had for long
been on the decline, but the monasteries had come to perform all kinds
of functions which were no part of their original purpose. The
consequence was that their violent suppression disorganized the social
and economic life in the community in many directions. Their
disappearance left a gap in the educational system of the country which
the reforms of the nineteenth century have attempted in vain to fill,
for the education of the people was largely in the hands of the monastic
establishments; what was not in their hands was in those of the chantry
priests, who were generally the local schoolmasters. So it came about
that when in the reign of Edward VI the chantries were also suppressed,
all provision for education practically came to an end. The reason why
so many educational endowments date from the reign of Edward VI is not
to be found in the surmise that as a consequence of the Revival of
Learning and the Reformation a sudden desire for enlightenment came over
society, but to the fact that when the monasteries were suppressed
certain people, feeling the gap which had been made in society, left
money for such foundations. The destruction of the monastic system of
elementary education reacted to undermine the position of the
universities, which nearly disappeared; for the monasteries not only
provided probationers for them but maintained many there to complete
their education. In the thirteenth century, it is said, there were
30,000students at Oxford, but to such an extent did university studies
decay that "in the six years from 1542 to 1548 only 191 students were
admitted bachelor of arts at Cambridge and only 173 at Oxford."When the
revival of the universities did take place, their character was
completely changed. They were no longer the democratic institutions of
the Middle Ages, but finishing-schools for the rich.

Educationalists might do worse than study the Mediaeval and monastic
system of education, for it obviated one of the most glaring defects of
the present system---the gulf between elementary and higher education.
This it did by a system of local autonomy, which made every elementary
school part of an institution which was primarily interested in the
pursuit of learning. In consequence of this there were no elementary
school teachers existing as a class apart, cut off from the main
currents of intellectual life, whose individuality was strangled by the
requirements of a code. On the contrary, the whole system was free and
humane, while it was organic from the top to the bottom; and this was
possible because the Medievalists were not interested in an abstraction
called "education," but in certain definite things which they were
anxious to teach. The problem of improvising machinery is so simple when
you know what you want it to do, and so perplexing when you don't.

# The Reformation in England

Though as an explanation of the whole course of history the materialist
conception is demonstrably false---since, among other things, it fails
to offer any explanation why capitalism, after dominating Pagan
civilization, was brought under control during the Mediaeval period---it
becomes more plausible from the Reformation onwards when the material
factor increasingly tends to determine social development. Before the
Reformation, landlordism and capitalism had, owing to the sinister
influence of Roman Law, got a foot hold in society; but landlords and
capitalists did not have things entirely their own way, for the Church
and Crown were still sufficiently powerful to exercise a restraining
influence. But after the suppression of the monasteries, the old order
received a blow from which it never recovered. The monastic lands, at
least a fifth of the wealth of the country, were transferred to the
great landowners, and this transference tipped the scale entirely in
their favour as against the peasantry.Landlordism and capitalism were
now triumphant, and with the change the economic equilibrium of society
was upset. This in turn reacted to upset the religious and political
equilibrium. The history of English politics from now onwards is to be
interpreted in the light of these central facts. Henceforth, policy
wavers between efforts to restore the equilibrium of society by seeking
a return to the past---the direction in which social salvation was to be
found and "progress" or the maintenance of vested interests---the policy
that was eventually adopted.

With the accession of Edward VI the absolutism of Henry was relaxed.
"The late king was doomed to the usual fate of despotic monarchs after
their death; the very men who during his life had been the most
obsequious ministers of his will, were now the first to overturn his
favourite projects."Though Henry had separated the English Church from
Rome and had suppressed the monasteries, he had not espoused the cause
of Protestantism. Whether this was from conscientious reasons, or
because in his early years having written a book in defence of the
Catholic Faith, that obstinacy and pride which were such very strong
features in his character prevented him from appearing to retract, must
be a matter of opinion. But all obstacles in the path of the spread of
the Protestant Faith were removed by his death. Edward VI was a minor,
and entirely in the hands of his ministers, chief among whom was the
Duke of Somerset, his Protector. Somerset was a moderate man who
disliked coercion and sought to govern on a basis of civil liberty and
religious toleration. The first Parliament that he summoned effected a
complete revolution in the spirit of the laws. The statute which at the
close of Henry's reign had given the force of law to Royal proclamations
was repealed. Nearly all the treasons created since 1352 were swept
away, many of the felonies, the Act of Six Articles by which Henry had
sought to enforce religious unity, the laws against heresy, all the
prohibitions against printing the Scriptures in English, against
reading, preaching, teaching or expounding the Scriptures were erased
from the statute-book. The immediate consequence of it all was that the
tongues of the divines were loosed and the land was filled with a Babel.
Heretics and sectarians, Lutherans, Calvinists and Zwinglians flocked to
England, which became one great scene of religious disputation with
London as its centre, few men knowing what or what not to believe. The
more trenchantly a preacher denounced the old doctrines, the greater
were the crowds that gathered to hear him. The New Learning carried all
before it in the large cities. This was not because the majority of the
nation desired religious change, but because the Catholic population who
had been accustomed to leave questions of theology to be settled by the
priests found themselves at a tremendous disadvantage when discussion on
religious questions had descended to the streets. Moreover, the issues
were new, and few Catholics knew how to answer the innovators; and
indeed this is never quite easy. We know to-day how long it often takes
to find a satisfactory answer to some heresy on social questions. We
often know a thing is wrong and yet can't find an answer then and there.
The Catholics were at this disadvantage at the first onslaught. New
interpretations of the Scriptures came upon them like a flood, and they
were no match for the zeal and conviction of their opponents. The only
answer they had for men who affirmed the right of private judgment was a
demand for respect for the authority of the Church, and this was for
them a very weak defence in an age when the Church had suffered so many
rude shocks.

The Catholics became very embittered. They blamed Somerset's leniency
and toleration for the Babel of opinion, and were ready to support any
movement to secure his overthrow. The plunderers, on the contrary, had
no objection to such disputation. Firstly, because it diverted attention
from them and their doings; and secondly, because if it went far enough
it would make reunion with Rome impossible, which was to their liking.
For, they reasoned, if they were to keep possession of their stolen
property England must be separated from Rome irrevocably. Hence the cry
of "No Popery" which figures so much in all accounts of the Reformation.
It was the watchword of the plunderers, since popery for them meant
restitution.

But while the plunderers were in accord with Somerset's policy of
religious toleration, they strongly objected to his attitude towards the
agrarian troubles that were brewing. Though he himself was one of the
greatest of the plunderers, having managed to get into his possession
over two hundred manors, he nevertheless did not stand in with the
others in their refusal of any justice to the peasants. He was in fact a
curious mixture of the spirit of the old and the new orders. While
apparently he thought it right to get hold of as much property as he
could lay his hands on, for his rapacity knew no bounds, on the other
hand he had a firm conviction that the ownership of property carried
with it certain responsibilities, and he actually got a private Act of
Parliament passed to give his tenants security of their tenure. It was
his known sympathy with the cause of the peasants that brought the
agrarian crisis to a head, giving rise to the Peasants' Revolt of 1549
that led to his fall.

Though the agrarian problem had been intensified by the suppression of
the monasteries, it did not begin with it but dates from the thirteenth
century when the Roman lawyers transformed the feudal lord, who was a
functionary administering communal land, into a landlord whose
possession of the land was absolute. From that time onwards land began
to be bought and sold, and the peasants lost that practical security
which they had enjoyed under the old Feudal System. The extension of
commerce gave rise to a moneyed class which established itself on the
land and gradually gained admission into governing circles. To these new
landlords the feudal idea of reciprocal rights and duties was altogether
foreign. They had bought the land, they regarded it primarily as an
investment, and sought to apply to it the same principles that they had
practised in trade, making it yield the utmost possible return for their
capital. It was not long before they discovered that owing to the high
price of English wool, for which there was a great market in the
Netherlands, the land could be made to yield much more if employed for
sheep-farming instead of tillage. It is said that by effecting this
change a landlord could double his income. But sheep-farming required
larger holdings and less labour. Hence it became the custom for these
new landlords to exercise their manorial rights to the full by enclosing
the common lands; to buy up several holdings and turn them into one. The
old homesteads were left to decay, and their former tenants became
either vagabonds or landless labourers.Another means whereby these new
landlords sought to get greater return for their capital was to raise
the rents of their tenants. This departure from custom and tradition was
a thing the old feudal lords would never have thought of doing, and it
was felt to be a stab in the back. The consequence of all these
innovations was to pauperize a large section of the community. Great
numbers became dependents of the monasteries which had come to the
rescue of these homeless men; when the monasteries were suppressed they
were left entirely destitute. The new proprietors of the Church lands
accepted no responsibility for them. In consequence they wandered about
begging and stealing, and in other ways became a source of danger to the
rest of the community.

The growth of this evil had not been allowed to pass unnoticed. Before
the monasteries were suppressed Sir Thomas More had written about the
evils following upon enclosures and sheep-farming. "Sheep are eating
men," a phrase which he used in his *Utopia*, has become classical. In
1517 Cardinal Wolsey made vigorous efforts to stop enclosures, but
without success. The cause of the peasants had also been advocated by
others in high places during the reign of Henry VIII, but he was too
busy getting himself divorced to trouble about the condition of the
peasants; while the suppression of the monasteries, to which in the end
he found himself committed if he was to be acknowledged as the head of
the Church in England, not only enormously increased the evil but the
resistance which he encountered from the old order led him to the
creation of a new aristocracy, which differed from the old one to the
extent that it did not arise to exercise a public function but to act as
an instrument of oppression, and as such it identified the idea of
government with oppression. It is not true, as Marxians maintain, that
the history of all hitherto existing society has been the history of
class struggles. It was not true of the Middle Ages until the revival of
Roman Law began to corrupt Mediaeval society, but it became entirely
true after Henry VIII created his plunder-loving aristocracy. But while
this generalization applies to the governing class as a whole, there
have at all times been a number of highly placed men who were exceptions
to this rule and sided with the people. It is of vital importance to any
proper understanding of the social problem that this fact should be
recognized, for the Marxian interpretation of history not only operates
to unite the enemy and to bring division into the reformers camp, but by
creating a prejudice against normal forms of social organizations tends
to thwart all efforts to reconstruct society on a democratic basis by
diverting the energies of the people into false channels.

Somerset, as we saw, was one of these men. His known sympathy with the
peasants brought the question to the front. He had denounced the
misdeeds of this new aristocracy with more warmth than prudence, and a
party which came to be known as the "Commonwealth's men" had come into
existence. *Discourses on the Common-weal* by John Hales, its most
active and earnest member, is one of the most informing documents of the
age. The failure of Parliament to give satisfaction gave rise to
agrarian disturbances in Hertfordshire in the spring of 1548. The
Protector took advantage of the occasion to appoint a commission to
enquire into enclosures. Though Hales and other reformers were members
of it, the opposition of the new aristocracy was such as to reduce it to
impotence. Hales had obtained from the Protector a general pardon for
those who had made illegal enclosures presented by the commission. But
this did not lessen the determination of their opposition. They set
themselves resolutely to defeat its ends. They packed the juries with
their own servants and threatened to evict any tenants who gave evidence
against them. They even went so far as to have them indicted at the
assizes. The consequence of such high-handed procedure was that in the
spring of 1549 there was a general uprising of the peasantry. Commencing
in Somersetshire, it spread to Cornwall and Devonshire, to Wiltshire,
Gloucestershire, Dorsetshire, Hampshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire,
Surrey, Norfolk and Suffolk. In the west changes of religion were made
the pretext of the rising. But in Norfolk no such pretext was made. The
rebels demanded satisfaction for their economic grievances. For a time
it was feared that the revolt might develop into a general rising like
the Peasants' War in Germany, and the new aristocracy was genuinely
alarmed. In general, however, the rebels acted without concert and
without leaders; but in the counties of Devon and Cornwall, and Norfolk
and Suffolk, the risings assumed a more threatening aspect. Armies were
formed which threatened the Government and would probably have
succeeded, but for the fact that England was at the time at war with
France, and the Government was able to use Italian, Spanish and German
mercenaries which had been raised for service in France. The rebels were
defeated in the west by Lord Russell and in the east by the Earl of
Warwick. The Protector found himself in an awkward position. His
sympathy with the insurgents had weakened his action, while his
readiness to screen and pardon offenders exasperated his colleagues. It
brought to a head the dissatisfaction with his policy. He was charged
with stirring up class hatred and with unwillingness to take drastic
action against the insurgents, and the Catholics united with the
plunderers to overthrow him. The movement was successful, and the Earl
of Warwick, who had now become the idol of the new aristocracy, became
Protector, with the title of the Duke of Northumberland.

Reaction now set in. The masses had risen against the classes, and the
classes resolved to retaliate. "Parliament met in a spirit of
exasperation and revenge, and it went back not only upon the radical
proposals of Somerset, but also upon the whole tenor of Tudor land
legislation. Enclosures had been forbidden again and again; they were
now expressly declared to be legal; and Parliament enacted that lords of
the manor might 'approve themselves of their wastes, woods, and pastures
notwithstanding the gainsaying and contra diction of their tenants.' In
order that the process might be without let or hindrance it was made
treason for forty, and felony for twelve, persons to meet for the
purpose of breaking down any enclosure or enforcing any right of way; to
summon such an assembly or incite to such an act was also felony; and
any copyholder refusing to help in repressing it forfeited his copyhold
for life. The same penalty was attached to hunting in any enclosure and
to assembling with the object of abating rents or the price of corn; but
the prohibition against capitalists conspiring to raise prices was
repealed, and so were the taxes which Somerset had imposed on sheep and
woollen cloths."

That the reaction should have assumed this form appears to have taken
the Catholics entirely by surprise. They had assisted the plunderers to
overthrow Somerset, not because they were unsympathetic to the cause of
the peasants but because of the encouragement he had given to heretics
and sectarians, and with the idea, apparently, that his overthrow would
be followed by a return to the Catholic worship. What they failed
entirely to understand was that Protestantism was acceptable to the new
aristocracy because it made their plunder secure. They failed to
perceive that capitalism was a much more deadly enemy than Protestantism
of the Catholic Faith, and that finally Protestantism was nothing less
than capitalism camouflaged. That they should have failed to perceive
this to the extent of being willing to support the plunderers to
overthrow Somerset, proves conclusively not only that they misgauged the
temper of the new aristocracy but that they had themselves lost sight of
the communal basis of Christianity. It is, I believe, to this fact that
the defeat of the Catholic Church at the Reformation is finally to be
attributed, for it led it into every imaginable political error. If the
Church had kept the communal aim of Christianity clearly to the
forefront of its mind, it would have reverted to the policy which it
pursued in the early Middle Ages of supporting the peasants against the
secular authorities. It was because the Church did this that it was
feared by the secular powers, and it remained powerful so long as this
aim was steadily kept in view. But when at a later date and as a
consequence of the revival of Roman Law the secular powers became more
powerful, the Church made the fatal mistake of seeking to combat the
growing spirit of materialism, not by a reaffirmation of the communal
basis of Christianity, but by an ever-increasing insistence upon the
principle of authority, of obedience to the Church. And this proved to
be fatal by confusing the issues. For the real issue was finally not
whether the Church or the State was to be uppermost, but whether the
communal basis of society was to be maintained. Yet, strange to say,
though this was the real issue at the back of all the quarrels between
Church and State, it never emerged into the light of day. The quarrel
had begun in the form of a challenge of the power of the Pope by the
Emperor, and so it remained to the end. The real issue was lost sight
of, and because it was lost sight of the Church lost the power of
popular appeal, and so finally was reduced to attempts to maintain its
position by intrigue. Because the Church gave emphasis to the
authoritarian rather than the communal aspect of Christianity it sought
after the Reformation to prop itself up by alliance with the temporal
powers, and in order to secure such alliances found itself obliged to
support the exploiters against the peasants, and so it came about that
while the Church succeeded in reforming itself at the
counter-Reformation it still finds it difficult to live down the
suspicions associated with this policy. So often to appearances has it
sided with capitalism that democrats fear that to submit to the
authority of the Church would be to submit to capitalism. The alliance
of the Roman Church with capitalism in Spain to-day is evidence that
this fear is not altogether unfounded. Socialists who have no prejudice
against Catholicism as such, who realize that during the Middle Ages it
was the sustainer of the communal life, do feel that though the Church
may sympathize with the workers it must remain powerless to help them so
long as it is anxious to secure the support of the temporal powers, for
under such circumstances when vital issues are at stake the Church
becomes a house divided against itself. "He that would save his life
must lose it" is a moral principle that has a lesson for the Church as
much as for the individual.

To return to our subject. It was not long before the Catholics were made
to suffer for their mistaken policy. The motto of the plunderers was:
Divide and conquer. Having with the assistance of the Catholics
succeeded in defeating the peasantry, the plunderers then began to
persecute the Catholics. The first Act of Uniformity, passed early in
Edward's reign, was now enforced against clerical offenders. Its object
had been to secure uniformity in Church services by means of a
compromise, which all might be persuaded or compelled to observe. A
little later a second Act of Uniformity was passed which extended the
scope of religious persecution by imposing penalties for recusancy upon
laymen. They were required to attend Common Prayer on Sundays and
holidays. If they were absent they were to be subject to ecclesiastical
censures and excommunication; if they attended any but the authorized
form of worship, they were liable to six months' imprisonment for the
first offence, a year's imprisonment for the second, and lifelong
imprisonment for the third. An incidental object of these reforms was
perhaps to relieve the financial embarrassment of the Government by the
seizure of a large quantity of Church property which became superfluous
by the extensive reduction of ritual which this Act effected, but its
main object was perhaps to prevent the growth of faction which was such
an embarrassment to the Government. Cranmer, who during the reign of
Henry VIII condemned people to the flames for not believing in
transubstantiation, was now ready to condemn them for believing in it.

With the accession of Mary, the policy was reversed. An attempt was made
to return to the *status quo ante*. Mary was a devout Catholic, she
sought the restoration of the Roman religion and the suppression of the
Protestant sects to which the leading reformers and plunderers belong.
Altogether, two hundred and eighty-six persons were put to death during
her reign. Some of these may have been martyrs to their opinions, but
the majority were the scoundrels who had plundered the monasteries and
who had sought by treachery to destroy the Queen herself. In restoring
the Catholic Faith and in acting against these scoundrels there can be
little doubt that Mary's actions were popular. Only three years before
her accession, the peasants had risen against the new aristocracy and
religious innovations in many parts of the kingdom, and the
insurrection, as we saw, had only been put down with the help of foreign
mercenaries. Was it not natural, therefore, that a Queen who sought to
restore the old worship and acted against a gang of ruffians should be
popular?

It had been Mary's intention to take the stolen property away from the
plunderers and to restore it to the Church. But this was no easy matter,
for there was scarcely a man of any note who had not in some degree
partaken of the spoils. Moreover, the lapse of time had created a vested
interest in the new order. Though the spoils of the Church had been
originally divided between a few, they had now by sales and bequests
become divided and subdivided among thousands, while a new economic life
had come to organize itself around the new order. Cardinal Pole, the
Pope's envoy, came at last to the conclusion that to demand the
restitution of the stolen property under conditions which involved the
compulsory surrender of the whole or a part of its possessions by almost
every family of opulence in the kingdom was impracticable. So the Papacy
decided to leave the plunderers in the undisturbed possession of their
property, and to confine their demands to a restoration of the Catholic
Faith and worship. On these terms, the Houses of Parliament agreed to
recognize the Papal supremacy and allowed Pole to pronounce the
reconciliation of England and the Church of Rome.

Though Mary assented to this compromise because no alternative, except
civil war, was open to her, she was resolved to keep none of the plunder
herself. She gave up the tenth and first-fruits; that is to say, the
tenth part of the annual worth of each Church benefice and the first
year's income of each, which hitherto had gone to the Papacy, the Church
and monastic lands, in fact, everything which Henry had confiscated and
which were in her possession. Her intention was to apply the revenues as
nearly as possible to their former purposes, and she did, in fact, make
a start with the restoration of institutions which her predecessors had
suppressed, in the face of great opposition. She did it against the
remonstrances of her Council and of Parliament, which feared that her
generous example would awaken in the people a hatred of themselves and
the desire for vengeance. Not to be undone, the plunderers entered into
a conspiracy against her. Before she had been on the throne many months
a rebellion was raised. The rebels were defeated and the leaders
executed, as was the case in a second rebellion which followed shortly
afterwards. Mary's experience seems indeed to prove that it would have
been better for her to have risked civil war against the plunderers at
the very start than to have allowed them to keep their spoil whilst
giving hers up; since from the enmity which she incurred by surrendering
the property her father had confiscated, arose those troubles which
harassed her during the remainder of her short reign, and which were to
some extent responsible for her early death.

Had Mary lived, it is possible that, having defeated two rebellions and
disposed of the leading conspirators, her example might have been
followed to some extent by the nobility and gentry. But she reigned only
five years, and Elizabeth, who succeeded, undid her good work and took
back the plunder. The reasons which led Elizabeth to reverse Mary's
policy are probably to be found in a regard for her own personal safety.
For she had no religious convictions like her sister, and her choice in
favour of Protestantism was more a matter of policy than of principle.
In the first two years of her reign she ran simultaneously two
policies---a Catholic and a Protestant one---until she could be sure
which way the wind was blowing. The arguments for and against
maintaining the Catholic worship were for her, apart from personal
considerations of safety, almost equally divided. On the one side of her
were the clergy in possession, who stood for the Roman supremacy and
were determined not to yield, and the peasantry who favoured the
Catholic worship. On the other was the new aristocracy of plunderers,
who clearly understood that their position would not be safe until
Protestantism triumphed, and the population of the towns which was
mainly in favour of religious change. If, therefore, she chose to
continue Mary's policy, she might have to face conspiracies and be worn
out by them like her sister. On the other hand if she espoused
Protestantism she was probably committed to a policy of religious
persecution so far as the major part of the nation was concerned. Her
choice was a difficult one for a person without religious convictions,
and in the circumstances it is not surprising that she sought to make
her own position secure by the adoption of Protestantism. But there was
a difficulty in the way. Scotland was Catholic. Mary Queen of Scots,
when married to the Dauphin of France, was styled at her court the Queen
of England and used the arms of England. So long, therefore, as Scotland
remained Catholic England, if Protestant, could not be free from attack.
Elizabeth therefore decided to second John Knox in his efforts to win
Scot land for the cause of Protestantism, and to supply him with money
and arms. In 1555 he returned from Geneva, to conduct an evangelical
campaign. He was a great organizer as well as preacher, and as he went
through Scotland new Churches sprang into existence everywhere. His
campaign was followed speedily by an insurrection, for the strife
between Catholicism and Calvinism was also a strife for the delivery of
Scotland from a foreign army. The Scottish Protestants besieged a small
French force in Leith, and a small English force was sent to support the
insurgents. The campaign was soon over. The French force surrendered,
very few Scots openly siding with the Queen and her French force.
Scotland now became Protestant, and danger was no longer to be
apprehended from an attack by land.

The issue was now clear. Elizabeth no longer hesitated, but threw
herself into the work of consolidating her position by forcing
Protestantism on England. If the Scottish revolt had miscarried it would
have been different. In the event of failure she had intended to marry
one of the Austrian cousins of Philip of Spain and to pursue a Catholic
policy. The English people were now irrevocably committed to
Protestantism, landlordism and capitalism, if they were to retain their
national independence. It was only by supporting Elizabeth through thick
and thin that they could keep themselves free from foreign
complications.

Elizabeth, then, had finally decided that England should become a
Protestant country. To attain this end she stuck at nothing. In spite of
all that had happened, the English people were still mainly Catholic in
their sympathies, and rivers of blood had to flow before they could be
changed. "The Protestant religion," says Cobbett, "was established by
gibbets, racks, and ripping knives." A series of Acts of Parliament were
passed which by degrees put down the Catholic worship and reintroduced
the Protestant form as it existed under Edward VI. Catholics were
compelled to attend Protestant worship under enormous penalties, and
when this failed an Act was passed compelling all persons to take the
oath of supremacy, acknowledging her instead of the Pope supreme in
spiritual matters on pain of death. Thus were thousands of people
condemned to death for no other crime than adhering to the religion of
their fathers, the religion, in fact, in which Elizabeth herself had
professed to believe until she became queen and had turned against it,
not from conscientious motives, but from considerations of convenience.
"Elizabeth," says Cobbett, "put, in one way or another, more persons to
death in one year, for not becoming apostates to the religion which she
had sworn to be hers, and to be the only true one, than Mary put to
death in the whole of her reign\... Yet the former is called or has been
called 'good Queen Bess,' and the latter 'bloody Queen Mary.'"

Elizabeth's successor, James I, continued her policy of persecuting the
Catholics. Before he came to the throne he had promised to mitigate the
penal laws which made their lives a burden, but he actually made them
more severe than ever, while there came with him from Scotland a horde
of rapacious minions who preyed upon the Catholic population, filling
their pockets by extracting from them the maximum in fines which the
statutes allowed. The consequence of this was the Gunpowder Plot which
was organized by a group of Catholics "to blow the Scotch beggars back
to their native mountains," as Guy Fawkes replied when asked why he had
collected so many barrels of gunpowder.

Mention has been made of the fact that the Duke of Somerset encouraged
the sectarians who flocked to England from the Continent to preach their
doctrines in order to make the breach with Rome final and irrevocable.
These sectarians were men of the same mentality as the heretics of the
Middle Ages, that is, men who were temperamentally incapable of seeing
truth as a whole, but would fasten themselves upon one aspect of it
which they insisted upon in a spirit of narrow fanaticism to the neglect
and denial of all other aspects of truth. At all times men of this type
are a danger to society, and in the Middle Ages they were kept well in
hand. But after the Reformation, when the Bible was translated, and
copies of it multiplied by the thousand by the printing press, recently
invented, these men got their chance. They challenged the Catholic
tradition upon which the Roman Church had based its authority with the
authority of the Bible, upon which without note or comment they took
their stand. As every one now began to interpret it in his own way, it
led to the growth of innumerable sects who poisoned the minds of nearly
the whole community. "Hence all sorts of monstrous crimes. At Dover a
woman cut off the head of her child, alleging that, like Abraham, she
had had a particular command from God. A woman was executed at York for
crucifying her mother; she had, at the same time, sacrificed a calf and
a cock. These are only a few amongst the horrors of that 'thorough godly
Reformation.' We read of killings in the Bible; and if every man is to
be his own interpreter of that book, who is to say that he acts contrary
to his own interpretation?"This is what making truth subjective comes to
in the sphere of religion. Only the affirmation that truth is objective
can make the common sense of men prevail.

Out of the medley of conflicting beliefs and opinions there gradually
emerged the Puritan Movement, which became such a formidable power in
the reign of Charles I. Its members were not bound together by a
community of beliefs but by a community of disbeliefs. They were united
in their hatred of all ritual and ceremonies, and in a longing for
liberty of conscience for all who subscribed to the "No Popery" cry, but
not for such as thought otherwise. This new religious development is in
one sense perhaps to be ascribed to the separation of religion from the
practical affairs of life which made it a personal rather than a social
consideration. The Catholic and Mediaeval idea had been that of
salvation by faith and good works, but with the rise of Protestantism
there came the idea of salvation by faith alone. This idea, which found
a ready support among the commercial class who desired to be at liberty
to determine their own standards of morality in respect to their trade
relationships, changed entirely the meaning of the idea of salvation by
faith. From being considered as a means to an end---the end being good
works---faith came to be regarded as the end in itself. And with this
change, religious faith lost its social significance. Instead of
implying the acceptance of certain moral, objective and revealed truths
which experience had proved to be necessary for the proper ordering of
society, it came to imply the acceptance of certain peculiar views as to
the personal nature of God. Religion became a matter of keeping on the
right side of God, whom the Puritans interpreted as a narrow-minded,
jealously dis posed person, much inferior to the average human being.
Hence the endless religious discussions to decide the best method of
propitiating the Deity, which naturally came about when religion lost
its original aim of seeking the establishment of the Kingdom of God upon
Earth and concerned itself with the less dignified aim of saving the
individual soul from eternal damnation.

Charles I, who came to the throne on the death of his father in 1625,
came into violent collision with this new power. He was one of the most
moral and religious men who ever wore a crown; but his autocratic
methods made him the last person in the world to deal with the Puritans.
Many were the grounds of quarrel between him and his Parliament and
people, but the great ground was that of religion. So far as the people
were concerned, the quarrel was genuine. They were Protestants and
Puritans by conviction, and they looked with suspicion upon Charles, who
had married a Catholic wife and was therefore suspected of designs to
restore the Catholic worship. His action in repealing the Sunday
Observance Laws was taken as evidence of such intention. But with the
Parliament the trouble was different. The landlords of whom it was
composed had grievances of their own. Under the two preceding reigns
they had been accustomed to have things very much their own way, and
they resented Charles's attempts to curb their power. Realizing the
troubles which arise from absenteeism, he requested the landowners to
live on their estates instead of spending their time in London. He
appointed a Com mission--"to inquire touching Depopulations and
conversions of Lands to Pasture"--an evil which was destroying rural
life and pressed hard upon the poorer inhabitants. Charles was
determined to put a stop to this scandal and imposed heavy fines upon
delinquents. Sir Anthony Roper was fined no less than 30,000 for
committing Depopulations. Further, Charles so arranged matters that the
weight of taxation fell entirely upon the trading and wealthy class, and
for this he was not forgiven. Parliament resolved to checkmate him.
Government was impossible without supplies, and they refused to vote him
any. Charles answered them by seeking to impose taxation without their
consent. Here was a clear issue about which they could fight with some
prospect of securing popular support. They raised the cry of arbitrary
government. That this arbitrary power was exercised in the interests of
the people against the land lords did not prevent the cry from catching
on, for when people put their faith in means rather than ends they can
be easily misled. The landlords artfully connected their own political
grievances, the exact nature of which they concealed from the people,
with the Puritan demand for religious liberty, whatever that may have
meant. "If it were not for their reiterated cry about religion," said
Hampden, "they would never be sure of keeping the people on their
side."It was by such means that Parliament secured the support of
London, which was the centre of Puritanism and which played such a
decisive part in the Civil War. The end was as we all know. Charles was
defeated, and eventually executed. The landlords triumphed, and
Parliament rewarded the people for their support by transferring to
their shoulders the burden of taxation which was taken off land and
profits on trade and put upon food. It was thus that the foundations of
English "liberty" were laid upon a firm and democratic basis, and
taxation broadened.

Since the defeat of Charles, no monarch or statesman has seriously
attempted to put a boundary to the depredations of landlordism and
capitalism. In his *Defence of Aristocracy*Mr. Ludovici has exalted
Charles as a national hero who led a forlorn hope against the stronghold
of capitalism and landlordism under which England still groans. Though
he glosses over the weaker side of Charles's character, he certainly
makes a very strong case out for him which leaves little doubt in one's
mind that Charles did try to govern England in the interests of the
people rather than in that of the landlords and capitalists; and,
moreover, that it was because he made this valiant attempt that he
eventually came to grief. So much we are willing to grant. But Mr.
Ludovici goes further, and seeks to make of his example a case for the
revival of aristocracy, forgetting, apparently, that the evil influences
against which Charles fought in vain were largely the creation of
another aristocrat, Henry VIII, and that while it can be shown that
individual aristocrats have placed the public interest before their own,
it is not true of any aristocracy considered as a class since the
revival of Roman Law.

With the reasons which have led Mr. Ludovici and others to advocate a
revival of aristocracy I have every sympathy. Like him, I realize the
practical difficulty of initiating measures for the public good, apart
from a recognition of the principle of authority. From one point of view
the problem confronting modern society is that of the re-establishment
of authority. But I contend that this difficulty is not to be met by any
attempted revival of aristocracy, because the authority of which we
stand in need is not primarily the authority of persons, but of *ideas*
or *things* as Mr. de Maeztu terms them. The authority of the aristocrat
presupposes the existence of certain common standards of thought and
action throughout the community; and if these are non-existent, as is
the case to-day, it is vain to seek a remedy in the authority of
persons. The thing to do is to seek the re-creation of the intellectual
unity of a common culture by bringing ideas and values into a true
relationship with each other. In proportion as this end can be attained
authority will reappear in society, for ideas tend to become
authoritative once they are accepted. When this is secured, the
difficulties which make Mr. Ludovici yearn for a revival of aristocracy
will have disappeared. Democracy and authority will no longer present
themselves as mutually exclusive principles, but as complementary ones.

# The French Revolution

"It is no idle Hibernianism," says Mr. Chesterton, "to say that towards
the end of the eighteenth century the most important event in English
history happened in France. It would seem still more perverse, yet it
would be still more precise, to say that the most important event in
English history was the event that never happened at all---the English
Revolution on the lines of the French Revolution."I That such a
revolution did not materialize in England was not due to any lack of
ardour on the part of those who would have brought it about, but to the
fact that the English governing classes and the rising manufacturing
class, land lords, churchmen, judges, and manufacturers, stood firmly
together in order to save themselves from the fate which had overtaken
the privileged classes in France. By such means they postponed the
crisis which threatened England towards the end of the eighteenth
century, until the development of railway building came to their rescue
by effecting a general revival of trade, and, within certain limits, a
redistribution of the wealth of the community.

The fact that the experiment in Revolution, to which all Western
European countries were moving towards the end of the eighteenth
century, was tried in France is to be attributed to the writings of
Rousseau. "But for Rousseau," said Napoleon, "there would have been no
Revolution," a conclusion which it is difficult to avoid, for it was
Rousseau who formulated the ideas which exercised such a profound
influence on the course of the Revolution. Apart from Rousseau, great
social, political, and economic changes would have taken place; for the
contrasts between wealth and poverty had become so great, famine so
prevalent, and the monarchical system of government so unworkable that
something had to be done. But there is strong evidence to support the
idea that if Rousseau and the intellectuals associated with him had not
inflamed the imagination of the French people with impossible dreams,
the change would not have taken the direction it did. It would have
moved towards a revival of Mediaeval institutions, for though it so
happened that such Mediaeval institutions as had survived to their day
had been corrupted by Roman Law, the Mediaeval tradition among the
peasants was still strong, as evidenced by the fact that in the years
following the American War, when systematic and widespread agitations
broke out in many parts of France, notably in the East, against the
dearness of food, the peasants, acting on their own initiative, sought a
solution of the problem by a revival of the central economic idea of the
Middle Ages---the idea of the Just Price. The rebel bands would compel
those who had brought corn to market to sell it at a Just Price, or else
they seized the corn and divided it among themselves at a Just
Price.This fact alone is of the greatest significance; its importance
cannot be exaggerated, for it indicates clearly the direction in which a
solution would have been sought had not the influence of Rousseau and
the intellectuals of his generation operated to confuse the issue by the
popularization of ideas which were antipathetic to the political and
economic philosophy of the Middle Ages.

The social, political and economic crisis which precipitated the
Revolution was accompanied by a paralysis of the body politic. The
Revolution came because the machinery of government would work no
longer. This state of things had been brought into existence by Louis
XIV, whose policy it had been to concentrate all power in the Crown.
Early in his reign he had sought to exclude the nobility from the chief
posts in the Government. This led to the revolt of the aristocracy known
as the Fronde, which he succeeded in quelling; after which he summoned
the nobles to his court, where he undermined what independence they
still retained by corrupting them with favours and pleasures. He
overcame the resistance of Parliament to his encroachments by haughtily
imposing upon it a silence and submission of sixty years duration.
Having by such means succeeded in destroying the independence of all who
might offer resistance to his authority, he directed his immense power
internally against the Protestants and externally in pursuing an
aggressive policy against Germany and the Netherlands. For a time
success seemed to follow him everywhere. Internal dissatisfaction with
his policy was drowned in songs of victory. But at length the tide
turned, the men of genius died, the victories ceased, industry emigrated
with the Protestants who fled from the country, and money became scarcer
and scarcer. Indeed, before his death Louis began to find, as other
despots have found, that the successes of despotism exhaust its
resources and mortgage its future.

The death of Louis was the signal of reaction; there was a sudden
transition from intolerance to incredulity, from the spirit of servility
to that of discussion and assertion. From then onwards, all through the
eighteenth century, the disintegration of society increased daily while
the Government fell into the hands of royal mistresses. Opposition
increased. The Third Estate, which possessed scarcely a third of the
land and was burdened with feudal rents to the lords of the manor,
tithes to the clergy and taxes to the king, without enjoying any
corresponding political rights and privileges, became more and more
opposed to the nobility who were exempt from taxation arid to the
wealthy clergy who swallowed the rich revenues of the bishoprics and
abbeys. Though they were divided among themselves, they were united in
their desire to remove such inequality of burdens, while they bitterly
resented the contempt with which they were treated by the upper classes.
As time wore on they became more and more united and increased in
strength, wealth and intelligence, until, finally, they successfully
revolted. Meanwhile, the finances got into a more and more difficult
condition, bringing about, finally, the state of things that in the
reign of Louis XVI led to the summoning of the States-general which in
turn led immediately to revolution.

Such was the problem which was developing when Rousseau made his
appearance. There was little or no understanding of the nature of the
problem with which France was then perplexed; but there was strong and
justifiable resentment at certain obvious and concrete evils. It was
apparent that the concentration of absolute power in the hands of the
monarchy was an evil of the first magnitude, while it was apparent that
the survival of feudal rights---of privileges without corresponding
responsibilities---was not merely an anachronism that needed to be
abolished, but that it imposed a crushing burden upon the poor, who were
called upon to support the system. Had Rousseau been familiar with the
historical growth of this problem he would have known that the
concentration of power in the hands of the monarchy and the corruption
of Feudalism were alike due to the influence of Roman Law, and that the
solution of the problem demanded, among other things, its supersession
by the Mediaeval Law which it had replaced. But not only was Rousseau
unaware of the extent to which the evils of society were to be traced
back to the revival of Roman Law but, like most, if not all, of his
contemporaries, he had a great admiration for it. He was a child of the
Renaissance, and as such was an admirer of the institutions of Greece
and Rome, of which, like the scholars who idealized them, he was
altogether uncritical. He was apparently unaware that the civilizations
of both Greece and Rome had been undermined by the unregulated use of
currency, and that the problem of its regulation which had eluded the
statesmen of Greece had found a solution in the Guilds of the Middle
Ages, which had been rendered economically possible by the triumph of
Christianity. On the contrary, not understanding that Paganism had
proved itself to be morally weak, he ascribed its decline to the spread
of Christian doctrines, which he considered had undermined the antique
virtues. He was ignorant of the fact that Christianity had triumphed
because it was a moral tonic capable of bracing up the fibre of decadent
civilizations. He had been prejudiced against Christianity in the days
of his youth because, brought up in Geneva, he had only known the
Calvinist version of it; and being interested in the things of this
world, while Calvinism was only interested in the things of the next, he
jumped to the conclusion that if ever society was to be regenerated it
would be necessary to abolish Christianity in favour of a revival of
Paganism.

It is in this light that the *Social Contract*, which lit the flames of
the Revolution, should be studied. Rousseau's ideas on civil religion do
not appear until the last chapter, but they provide the key to his whole
position. In order to understand Rousseau, it is necessary to read him
back wards. The immediate problem with which he was concerned and which
made him favour a Pagan form of worship was his desire to see an
identity between Church and State, which he recognized did not exist in
Christian societies! That such a union might not be desirable, that its
disadvantages might outweigh the advantages, never for a moment occurred
to him. So obsessed was he with the idea of unity that he never saw that
religion and politics, when real, never were and never can be the same
thing. Hence it was that in his search for unity he fused the categories
of religious and political thought. It would be more strictly true to
say that he confused them, for clear thinking demands that they should
remain in their separate categories. While religion concerns itself with
the ideal, politics must concern itself with the real if it is to give
practical results. Hitherto this difference of function had been clearly
recognized. In the normal society as it existed in the Middle Ages it
was clearly recognized that while it was the function of the Church to
make good men, it was the function of government to build them into the
social structure. Moreover, it was recognized that the success of the
legislator was ultimately dependent upon the success of the priest. The
maintenance of the Just Price presupposes the existence of just men, and
no one in the Middle Ages ever entertained the contrary idea that the
arrival of an ideal social system could precede the arrival of ideal
men. But when, after the Renaissance, scepticism in regard to religion
invaded the intellectual world and capitalism triumphed and privileges
were abused, men of religious temperament, instead of entering the
Church as they would have done in the Middle Ages, remained outside and
turned to political speculation. The consequence of this was that they
infused the sphere of politics with the idealism which is proper to
religion, but which can have no place in politics because politics must
concern itself with men as they are and not with men as they might be.
In this mood Rousseau, realizing that certain evils which he saw around
him were attributable to bad government, and wishing to see them
remedied, turned from speculating on ways and means of remedying these
abuses to speculation on the form which an ideal State should take. But
instead of setting to work in the way Mediaevalists would have done---to
consider, firstly, how to produce good men, and then to determine what
form of government would be best suited for giving the best results from
the material so produced---good, bad, and indifferent---Rousseau began
by first thinking out how the ideal State should be constituted, and
then turned to consider how men might be disciplined in order that his
ideal State could be maintained in its integrity. This inversion of the
natural order of thought runs all through the *Social Contract*, and it
was this that led to the tyrannies and violence of the Revolution. For
while religion seeks to discipline man by an appeal to his heart and
conscience, the State is powerless to maintain a discipline except
through the exercise of force. The Jacobins, when they sought to
regenerate France by sending delegates with guillotines into the
provinces, were in their crude way attempting to give practical
application to a principle which Rousseau had enunciated.

It was because Rousseau made morality wholly dependent upon law, as at a
later date Marx made it wholly dependent upon economic conditions, that
he was so anxious to devise a State which would be mechanically perfect
in its workings. If morality is to be dependent upon law it is a matter
of vital importance that the State should be so constructed that the
evil desires in man will balance and neutralize each other in an
equilibrium of good. But, of course, it cannot be done. The search for
perpetual motion is not a more hopeless quest, for man cannot by laws be
made to go straight in spite of himself. The utmost laws are capable of
doing is to secure outward observance of the moral standards of those in
power. They may, like Mediaeval Law, aim at enabling good men to live
among bad; or, like Roman Law, at enabling rich men to live among poor;
but to create living standards of morality they are powerless, for if
the law attempts to get ahead of public opinion it will not be observed,
while the attempt of a Government to secure observance under such
conditions would be to institute a tyranny that would be its undoing.

The particular form of government which Rousseau thought would
automatically promote the public welfare was one based upon the
sovereignty of the people. He says:

"One essential and inevitable defect which will render a monarchical
government inferior to a republican one is that in the latter the public
voice hardly ever raises to the highest posts any but enlightened and
capable men, who fill them honourably; whereas those who succeed in
monarchies are most frequently only petty mischief-makers, petty knaves,
petty intriguers, whose petty talents, which enable them to obtain high
posts in courts, only serve to show the public their ineptitude as soon
as they have attained them. The people are much less mistaken about
their choice than the prince is; and a man of real merit is almost as
rare in a royal ministry as a fool at the head of a republican
government. Therefore, when by some fortunate chance one of these born
rulers takes the helm of affairs in a monarchy almost wrecked by such a
fine set of ministers, it is quite astonishing what resources he finds,
and his accession to power forms an epoch in a country."

From the foregoing passage as from others which might be quoted, it is
evident that Rousseau did not believe in Equality as it is understood by
democrats to-day. He would have answered the democrat who asserts that
the people have a right to exercise power regardless of the use which
they make of it, by saying that democrats in that case take their stand
on precisely the same ground as the authoritarian who believes in the
divine right of kings. Both have one thing in common: they make power
subjective and absolute instead of objective and conditional upon the
fulfilment of duties. This was not Rousseau's idea. Strictly speaking,
Rousseau did not believe in Equality at all, but in natural
inequalities. He wanted to get rid of the inequalities based upon wealth
and influence in order to clear the way for what may be termed the free
movement in society of natural inequalities. He believed in government
by the wise. "It is," he says, "the best and most natural order of
things that the wise should govern the multitude, when we are sure they
will govern it for its advantage and not for their own." The wise were
to be the executive officers of the State, but he wanted the people to
be sovereign in order that they might keep a check on them. In this
sense only did Rousseau believe in Equality. He did not regard it as an
end in itself, but as a means to an end, the end being government by the
best and wisest. There is something very simple and unsophisticated
about all this. The whole trouble of the world from one point of view is
precisely that the best and wisest do not automatically come to the top
under democracy any more than they do under any other form of
government. It is the clever rather than the wise who do, and,
unfortunately, the wise are rarely clever, nor are the clever usually
wise. When the wise do come to the top the millennium will have arrived.

Rousseau himself realized this difficulty when he considered the problem
of the legislator. He was of the opinion that neither the sovereign
people nor the executive were wise enough to frame good laws. The
successful accomplishment of such a task required a superman. Of the
legislator or lawgiver he says:--

"Wise men who want to speak to the vulgar in their own language instead
of in a popular way will not be under stood. Now, there are a thousand
kinds of ideas which it is impossible to translate into the language of
the people. Views very general and objects very remote are alike beyond
its reach; and each individual approving of no other plan of government
than that which promotes his own interests, does not readily perceive
the benefits which he is to derive from the continual deprivations which
good laws impose. In order that a newly formed nation might approve
sound maxims of politics and observe the fundamental rules of State
policy, it would be necessary that the effect should become the cause;
that the social spirit, which should be the work of the institution,
should preside over the institution itself, and that men should be,
prior to the laws, what they ought to become by means of them. Since,
then, the legislator cannot employ either force or reasoning, he must
needs have recourse to an authority of a different order, which can
compel without violence and persuade without convincing.

"It is this which in all ages has constrained the founders of nations to
resort to the intervention of Heaven, and to give the gods the credit
for their own wisdom, in order that the nations, subjected to the laws
of the State as to those of nature, and recognizing the same power in
the formation of man and in that of the State, might obey willingly and
bear submissively the yoke of the public welfare. The legislator puts
into the mouths of the immortals that sublime reason which soars beyond
the reach of common men, in order that he may win over by divine
authority those whom human prudence could not move. But it does not
belong to every man to make the gods his oracles, nor to be believed
when he proclaims himself their interpreter. The great soul of the
legislator is the real miracle which must give proof of his mission\...
The choice of the moment for the establishment of a government is one of
the surest marks for distinguishing the work of the legislator from that
of the tyrant."

Apart from the exceptional problem which the law giver presents,
Rousseau quite rightly realized that in general there are certain
external circumstances which favour the rise to power of the wise as
there are certain others which tend to obstruct them. He saw that the
wise stood the best chance of success in the world, where men were well
known to each other, and where a certain measure of economic equality
obtained. Hence his advocacy of small States and of small property. But
he was not a leveller. He says, "with regard to Equality we should not
understand that the degrees of power and wealth should be absolutely the
same; but that, as to power, it should fall short of all violence, and
never be exercised except by virtue of station and of the laws; while as
to wealth, no citizen should be rich enough to be able to buy another,
and none poor enough to be forced to sell himself\... It is precisely
because the force of circumstances is ever tending to destroy Equality
that the force of legislation should always tend to maintain it."
Rousseau's attitude towards property was not that of the Collectivist.

It will make the position clearer to say that the ideal of Rousseau was
that of the City States of Greece, which existed independently of each
other while they were federated for the purpose of defence. He saw that
this meant putting the clock back; but this did not deter him. He
realized, as all men do whose reasoning faculties have not been
atrophied by the idea of Progress, that any fundamental change in the
social system involves in some degree a return to a former social
condition. All Socialist ideas imply reversion, but the fact that
Socialists are afraid to admit it has led them into the maze of
intellectual confusion in which they find themselves. But Rousseau lived
in an age when men were not afraid of words, and so boldly advocated a
return to the conditions of primitive society. In an earlier work he had
demanded the renunciation of cultivated life which he asserted led to "a
distinction of the talents and a disparagement of the virtues," in
favour of a return to nature which was to be made the starting-point for
a nobler form of existence. His description of the life of primitive
society was so vivid and full of detail, while it gave such a feeling of
reality to the existence of a golden age in the past, that Voltaire said
"it made one desire to walk on all fours." Though Rousseau's description
was a work of pure fiction---for of primitive man he knew nothing---it
came to be believed in as gospel truth, because it served its purpose of
contrasting a simple, unsophisticated mode of existence with the
artificiality and corruption of France, and gave emphasis to his
denunciations of property, privileges and tyranny. In the Social
Contract his enthusiasm for primitive man appears to have abated
somewhat. Perhaps, after all, there was something to be said for
civilization. It was not to be regarded merely as a disease. If many
natural advantages are lost, equal or greater ones are secured. Law and
morality replace appetite and instincts; moreover, there are certain
advantages in co-operation. Hence, though it is necessary to return to
the past, he considers that it will not be necessary to return to any
state of society prior to the civilization of early Greece.

It was because Rousseau was mistaken as to the historical nature of the
problem which confronted society that he was led to regard the Greek
States as models. Remembering that these States were entirely undermined
by unregulated currency, Rousseau, to have been consistent, should have
demanded the abolition of currency. That he did not is to be explained
by the circumstance that he was apparently as ignorant of the fact that
unregulated currency had destroyed the civilization of Greece and Rome
as of the further fact that the solution of this problem was found by
the Mediaeval Guilds. Had he known these facts, the course of history
might have been different. Instead of seeking a solution that was
primarily political he would have sought one that was primarily
economic. He would have supported the peasants in their demand for the
re-establishment of the Just Price, and would have considered ways and
means of restoring the Guilds to maintain it. He would, moreover, have
seen that within the Guilds the people were sovereign in the Middle
Ages, while their sovereignty was not based upon slavery, as was the
case with the sovereign peoples of Greece. On this issue Rousseau was
not honest with himself. Though he condemns slavery, he glosses over the
fact that the States which he exalted as models were based upon slavery.
"Slavery," he says, "is one of the unfortunate inconveniences of
civilized society."

The technical cause of the confusion in which Rousseau found himself is
to be found in the revived interest in Roman Law which had established
the tradition of thinking about economic problems entirely in terms of
property. In my chapter on Greece and Rome I drew attention to the
mutual dependence of Roman Law and an unregulated currency, pointing out
that Roman Law came into being not for the purpose of securing justice,
but to postpone the dissolution of a society which had been rendered
politically unstable through the growth of capitalism---itself the
consequence of unregulated currency. Despairing of the effort to secure
justice, the Roman jurists addressed themselves to the more immediately
urgent task of maintaining order by fol lowing the line of least
resistance. Not understanding how to regulate currency even if it had
been practicable in Rome, they sought to give protection and security to
private property as the easiest way of avoiding continual strife among
neighbours. The consequence of this was that when after the Reformation
thinkers went to Roman Law for guidance in their speculations as to how
to render government stable, the tradition became established of
thinking about social and political questions primarily in terms of
property instead of in currency. The result of this has been that down
to this day social theory is presented statically rather than
dynamically. Rousseau's social theory was no exception to this rule. It
did not deal with the sequential steps which would have to be taken
towards the realization of his ideal society, but presented a new
society already full grown. This limitation of Rousseau's theory became
increasingly apparent as the Revolution developed. Not only did his
constructive ideas bear no particular relationship to the problems which
had to be met, but they were a positive obstruction in the path of their
solution, by filling the minds of the revolutionaries with *a priori*
ideas which obscured the real issues. The Revolution rapidly became a
collision between theorists fired with a new ideal and the political,
social and economic conditions of which they had no com prehension. Not
comprehending them, they sought in vain to direct the course of events
until, exasperated by failure, they came to commit crimes of which they
had no presentiment at the beginning.

Rousseau misled the revolutionaries by focusing attention upon the wrong
aspect of the economic problem. He talked about property and ignored
currency. I make bold to say that the centre of gravity of the economic
problem is not in property, but in currency, for currency is the vital
thing, the thing of movement. It is the active principle in economic
development, while property is the passive. It is true that profits
which are made by the manipulation of currency, sooner or later assume
the form of property. All the same, the root mischief is not to be found
in property but in unregulated currency. To solve the problem of
currency by the institution of a Just Price under a system of Guilds for
the regulation of exchanges, and the adjustment of the balance between
demand and supply, is to bring order into the economic problem at its
active centre. Having solved the problem at its centre, it will be a
comparatively easy matter to deal with property which lies at the
circumference. Property-owners would be able to offer no more effective
resistance to change than hitherto landlordism has been able to offer to
the growth of capitalism. By such means the reconstruction of society
would proceed upon orderly lines. All that it would be necessary to do
would be for the democratic movement to exert a steady and constant
pressure over a decade or so, and society would be transformed without
so much as a riot, much less a revolution. But to begin with property is
to get things out of their natural order, for it is to proceed from the
circumference to the centre, which is contrary to the law of growth. It
is to precipitate economic confusion by dragging society up by its
roots; and this defeats the ends of revolution by strengthening the
hands of the profiteer, for the profiteer thrives on economic confusion.
Of what use is it to seek to effect a redistribution of wealth before
the profiteer has been got under control? So long as men are at liberty
to manipulate exchange, they will manage to get the wealth of the
community into their hands. This is no idle theory. All through the
French Revolution, as, indeed, according to reports, in the Russian
Revolution of to-day, speculation was rife, paper money depreciated,
while a class of *nouveaux riches* came into existence and the
Assemblies were powerless against them. Marat might call for "the
accursed brood of capitalists, stock-jobbers and monopolists to be
destroyed." But it was easier said than done. For these men exercised a
function which was absolutely indispensable to the life of the
community. They organized distribution, and it was because the leaders
of the Revolution entirely failed to see the primacy of distribution
that they let the profiteers in. Under the pressure of circumstances the
Jacobins decreed a maximum price for provisions. But its effect was only
to cause continual dearth. Though the Jacobins could terrorize the
Convention, they could not control the revolutionary profiteers. For the
control of currency and exchange, which would have been a comparatively
simple proposition at the start, was altogether impracticable when the
country was in the throes of revolution. If instead of beginning with
the destruction of Feudalism, the revolutionaries had begun with the
regulation of currency and exchange, the chaos of the Revolution would
have been avoided, and Feudalism would have fallen later as dead leaves
fall from a tree. The solution of the social problem, as of every other
problem in this universe, resolves itself finally into one of order.
Take issues in their natural order and everything will straighten itself
out beautifully, all the minor details or secondary parts will fall into
their proper places. But approach these same issues in a wrong order and
confusion results. No subsequent adjustments can remedy the initial
error. This principle is universally true. It is as true of writing a
book, of designing a building, as of conducting a revolution. The secret
of success in each case will be found finally to rest upon the
perception of the order in which the various issues should be taken.

It was because Rousseau had built the elaborate super structure of his
reasoning upon a foundation of false history that he was driven to
postulate the existence of something at the centre of society which he
termed the General Will, and upon which he relied to usher in the new
social order. Exactly what he meant by this General Will is most
difficult to determine, for while on the one hand he exalts it into a
fetish capable of performing every imaginable kind of political miracle,
on the other he proceeds to qualify his original proposition in so many
ways as almost to rob it of any definite meaning. "So long," he says,
"as a number of men in combination are considered as a single body they
have but one will, which relates to the common preservation and the
general well-being. In such a case all the forces of nature are vigorous
and simple, and its principles are clear and luminous; it has no
confused and conflicting interests; the common good is everywhere
plainly manifest, and only good sense is required to perceive it. Peace,
union and equality are foes to political subtleties. Upright and
simple-minded men are hard to deceive because of their simplicity;
allurements and refined pretexts do not impose upon them; they are not
even cunning enough to be dupes\... A State thus governed needs very few
laws; and in so far as it becomes necessary to promulgate new ones the
necessity is universally recognized. The first man to propose them only
gives expression to what all have previously felt, and neither factions
nor eloquence will be needed to pass into law what every one has already
resolved to do, so soon as he is sure that the rest will act as he
does." The General Will, he goes on to say, is indestructible. It is
always constant, unalterable, and pure; but when private interests begin
to make themselves felt, it is subordinated to other wills which get the
better of it. After telling us all these fine things he has some
misgivings, and proceeds: "the General Will is always right, but the
judgment which guides it is not always enlightened," and that "there is
no general will with reference to a particular object." After making
these qualifications there does not appear to be very much of the
General Will left, and we begin to wonder what was at the bottom of his
mind. The only explanation I can offer of these apparent contradictions
is that the General Will is something which relates to the subliminal
consciousness of mankind, but is not a part of his normal consciousness.
Mr. de Maeztu says there is no such thing as a General Will, since "men
cannot unite immediately among one another; they unite in things, in
common values, in the pursuit of common ends,"and Mr. de Maeztu, I
think, is right.

What Rousseau feared came about. All the careful detailed reservations
he made to protect possible misapplications of the principles he
enunciated were disregarded by his followers. All the ideas which he
regarded as means to ends came to be exalted as ends in themselves, and
to be believed in with all the fervour of strong religious conviction.
Nature, the Rights of Man, Liberty, Equality, the Social Contract,
hatred of tyrants and popular sovereignty were for the Jacobins the
articles of a faith which was above and beyond discussion. They did not
believe these things in the more or less philosophic spirit in which
Rousseau believed them, but in the way that only men of simple and
violent temperaments can believe things. Their firm conviction made them
the driving force of the Revolution, for it gave them great strength of
will, which enabled them completely to dominate the more intelligent but
weaker-willed members of the Assemblies, while it created a kind of
revolutionary religion in France which inspired the armies of the
Revolution.

In the Constituent Assembly the Jacobins were a small group, and at no
time were they very numerous, though during the Convention they
dominated France. The Revolution had not yet got its stride. This first
Assembly consisted of landlords, magistrates, physicians, and lawyers.
It was what in these days would be called a business Government; that
is, a Government of men who wanted to see things changed politically,
but not economically, who believed in liberty, but not in equality. They
enjoyed the illusion which business men generally enjoy, that what is in
their personal interests is necessarily in the interests of the
community. This limitation, though it gives annoyance to others, may
not, under normal conditions, have serious consequences, but in a time
of crisis it is a fatal defect for a class who seek to wield power, for
it raises a barrier between them and popular feeling. So it was that the
Constituent Assembly forfeited the confidence of the people by two of
their actions. They thought they could decree the abolition of feudal
rights while asking the peasants to pay for their surrender, and that
they could limit the franchise to property-owners while men were
preaching daily Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. Their attempt to
distinguish between property-owners whom they termed *active citizens*,
and other members of the community whom they termed *passive citizens*,
was unfortunate for them. For this distinction was open to an
interpretation the exact contrary of that which they had intended.
Journalists protested that those who stormed the Bastille and cleared
the lands regarded themselves as the *active citizens*, and objected to
being treated as the mere raw material of a revolution for the benefit
of others. But such protests were in vain. The members of the
Constituent Assembly were entirely out of touch with popular feeling.
And they remained out of touch until the people of Paris, armed with
pikes, invaded the Assembly Hall to break up their deliberations---a
habit which, once formed, continued almost daily throughout the
Revolution. The Convention, while under the influence of the Girondins,
corrected the blunder of the Constituent Assembly by removing the
distinction between the *active* and *passive* citizens, but in other
respects it was equally out of touch with popular sentiment. As a
result, power in the Assembly passed entirely into the hands of the
Jacobins, who, whatever their shortcomings, at least enjoyed the
confidence of the people of Paris.

The rise to power of the Jacobins---known in the Convention as the
Mountain as distinguished from the Plain, which designated all its other
members---is to be attributed to many causes, but the principal one was
the imperative necessity of firm government. The Girondins, who had
hitherto led the Assembly, were Liberals in temperament, and like
Liberals all the world over they had little sense of reality. They were
hostile to a strong executive in the name of Liberty, hostile to Paris
in the name of Federalism, and hostile to the economic aspirations of
the people in the name of Order. The result was as might be expected:
they were conquered by the force of circumstances. A time came at length
when the growth of economic anarchy and civil war at home, combined with
the need of defending the Republic against other European Powers,
demanded strong and vigorous measures, and these the Girondins were
unable to supply. Power passed into the hands of the Jacobins, because
they alone were capable of determined action.

The situation had been of the Jacobins own creating. Earlier on they had
been the means of bringing about the execution of the King, which proved
to be the turning-point of the Revolution, for not only did it bring
about civil war, but armed Europe against France. In order to save the
Republic from its enemies without, and from disruption within, the
Jacobins resorted to the most ruthless measures. They massacred people
wholesale. In the Vendee alone it is estimated that over half a million
suffered at their hands. Old men, women, and children were all
massacred, and villages and crops were burned. Yet in spite of all their
savagery, despite the delegates sent with guillotines into the provinces
and the Draconian laws which they enforced, they had to struggle
perpetually against riots, insurrections and conspiracies. But the
reaction upon themselves is the interesting sequel. They would brook no
opposition, and in order to carry through such ruthless measures they
had to be equally ruthless with their critics. It was in order to rid
themselves of them that they instituted the Terror, which, after a run
of ten months, came to an end with the execution of Robespierre and the
leading Jacobins. Not that Robespierre was by any means the worst
offender. On the contrary, his influence had not infrequently been
exerted in favour of moderation. At a time when to be considered an
"Indulgent" was an accusation pointing to the scaffold, he successfully
opposed the arrest of seventy-three members of the Convention, saved
Catherine Théot and her companions, and defended his rival Danton when
his arrest was first suggested; while he repeatedly refused to sign
warrants for intended arrests, and had earned the lasting enmity of
Fouché, Carrier, Collôt, Tallien, Billaud-Varennes and others by his
denunciation of their atrocities, and had been the means of effecting
their return from the provinces. It was the action of these men that
immediately led to his downfall. So intent was Robespierre on carrying
the *system of virtue* to its logical conclusion that a time came when
they felt their lives were no longer safe, and so they combined with the
Moderates to effect his overthrow. Robespierre gave them the
opportunity. Naturally suspicious, he complained of conspiracies, and
his over-confidence led him to attempt to get the Assembly to vote a
measure which would permit deputies to be sent to the Revolutionary
Tribunal without authorization of the Assembly. Certain members, feeling
that Robespierre was aiming at them, and who had therefore nothing to
lose, met this proposal with a vigorous opposition. Such determined
action broke the spell that Robespierre had cast over the Assembly.
Members who had been afraid were afraid i.o longer, and the next day the
attack was vigorously renewed. Robespierre tried to defend himself, but
was met with cries of "Down with the tyrant!" From that moment
Robespierre was lost. Thanks to mental contagion, the cry instantly
became general, and his voice was drowned in the uproar. Without losing
a moment the Assembly decreed his accusation and outlawed him. He
appealed to the Commune of Paris, but the Convention was triumphant
against his supporters. After the lapse of a few days Robespierre and
his band of Jacobins to the number of a hundred and four were
guillotined. As his name had become popularly associated with the
Terror, his execution was interpreted by the people as having put an end
to it. The Committee of Public Safety, recognizing this, acted as if all
along such had been their intention, and the Terror came to an end.

But there were deeper reasons than personal enmities to account for the
fall of Robespierre. The Revolution had entered its decadent phase. When
the property of the nobles and clergy had been confiscated, instead of
being returned to the people to be held communally, it was sold by the
Assemblies to private individuals \\when they were in need of money.
These large estates were on sale for several years on terms extremely
favourable to purchasers, and had not only been bought by such peasants
as could get hold of money, army contractors and food profiteers, but by
members of the Convention itself; while, moreover, thousands of Jacobins
had secured posts under the Government for themselves. It was thus that
the Revolution had created new vested interests and the corruption had
not only penetrated the Convention but the Jacobin Party itself. Honest
Republicans found themselves helpless against it. Robespierre was
oblivious to these changes. He remained as upright and fanatical as
ever, never wavering in his revolutionary faith, for ever reminding the
people of the principles of Republicanism, and threatening those keenest
after the spoils with the guillotine. So a coalition came into existence
which regarded the overthrow of Robespierre as the first point to be
gained. They had supported him so long as they feared a return of the
*ancien régime*, but when the Allies had been defeated they had no
further use for him. "What," said they, "is the good of a revolutionary
government now that the war is over?" The ends of the Revolution, so far
as the great mass of its supporters were concerned, having been
attained, they desired it to be brought to an end and to be confirmed in
the possession of their riches. It was because Robespierre failed to
realize the change that had taken place that he eventually came to
grief. The only true Republicans now left were the young men, and they
were to be found in the armies spreading the revolutionary ideas over
Europe.

The fall of Robespierre prepared the way for the counter-revolution that
took place a little over a twelvemonth after his death. It took the form
of a rebellion of the *nouveaux riche*. During the course of the
Revolution production steadily declined, and the wholesale issue of
paper money had depreciated the currency to such an extent that the
general want was terrible. A time came when Republican idealism vanished
before the general demand for food and security, and this played into
the hands of the rich, who asserted that on the maintenance of property
depended the cultivation of the fields, all production, every means of
work and the whole social order. The absence of it, they contended, had
resulted in a general want of confidence on the part of producers,
merchants and traders, and was responsible for the economic confusion
and depression. Indeed, from the point of view of the Republicans there
was no answer. They had rejected the idea of the communal ownership of
land in favour of private ownership. They had sold the confiscated
estates, and it was now up to the Government to guarantee the new owners
in the possession of their lands. The counter-revolution was successful,
confidence was restored and trade revived. It was thus that power passed
out of the hands of the nobility into the hands of the bourgeoisie. The
Revolution had miscarried.

As the Revolution proceeded, power became concentrated in fewer and
fewer hands. The Committee of Public Safety, which had dominated the
Convention, consisted of eight members. Under the Directory which
followed, the executive power was vested in the hands of five men. This
was provided for in its constitution, the framing of which was the last
act of the Convention. In so far as the change was accompanied by a
change of policy it was in the direction of not seeking to reorganize
France but to leave it to organize itself, yet though the Directory left
France to make its own economic readjustment, it was quite as ruthless
as the Convention in its efforts to preserve the Republic, for it had to
struggle against a succession of conspiracies against its power.
Recognizing that a revival of Catholicism was taking place, the
Directors imagined that the priests were conspiring against them and
deported in one year nearly fifteen hundred of them under conditions
which gave them little chance of survival, to say nothing of large
numbers who were summarily executed, for though the Terror was
abandoned, their methods were no less sanguinary. But in spite of their
efforts things went for them steadily from bad to worse. Finance,
administration, everything, in fact, was crumbling, until at length a
point was reached when the Directors, feeling that things could not go
on much longer, themselves sought a dictator who was at the same time
capable of restoring order and protecting them. This is the explanation
of the *coup d'état* which placed Napoleon in power. It was arranged by
the Directors themselves as the only escape from an impossible
situation.

It is a mistake to suppose that Napoleon overthrew the Revolution. On
the contrary, he ratified and consolidated it. As early as 1795, at the
end of the Convention, the idea had been canvassed of restoring the
monarchy, but Louis XVIII having been tactless enough to declare that he
would restore the *ancien régime* in its entirety, return all property
to its original owners and punish the men of the Revolution, put himself
out of court for the position. Indeed, the Royalists must have been
impossible people. Even Le Bon says: "The Royalists gave proof during
the whole of the Revolution of an incapacity and narrowness of mind
which justified most of the measures taken against them." The Monarchy
being impossible, it was necessary to find a general. Only one existed
whose name carried weight---Bonaparte. The campaign of Italy had made
him famous. He had been repeatedly pressed by the most influential and
enlightened generals to place himself at the head of the Republic, but
he refused to act upon their advice. He saw very clearly the
difficulties which would beset him if he acted prematurely. He saw that
the task of rebuilding France was impossible unless he were in a
position to exercise absolute power in order that measures might be
carried through with the greatest possible speed, which, of course, was
impossible if every measure had to be preceded by a long discussion in
the Assemblies. He saw, moreover, that he must be beyond the reach of
parties, and so he preferred to wait until the Directorate itself should
seek his assistance. Conscious of the fact that his ideas upon the art
of governing differed fundamentally from theirs, he refused to have
anything to do with the government of France until they were willing to
allow him to govern in his own way, and he had sufficient insight to see
that a time was bound to come when conditions would have reached such a
pass that they would be willing to grant him his terms.

Napoleon reserved to himself the right of initiating all laws, and he
restricted the duties of the Assemblies to confirming or rejecting them.
Yet while he insisted upon having the last word in the framing of all
new laws, he always conferred with the two other Consuls with whom he
was associated before proceeding even with the most trivial measures. He
chose his agents of government indifferently from the Royalists,
Girondins, or Jacobins, having regard only to their capacities. But
although in his Council he sought the assistance of eminent jurists, he
appears to have been always up against them, for he is reported to have
said that any measure which is promoted for the public good is sure to
meet with the opposition of lawyers. This fact is not surprising when we
remember that lawyers are trained in the tenets of Roman Law, which is
individualistic in intention, while measures for the public good are
necessarily communal in aim.

I said that Napoleon ratified and consolidated the Revolution. His
authority speedily put an end to the Parisian insurrections and attempts
at monarchical resistance and restored moral unity where there had only
been division and hatred. He provided work for the unemployed in
building, the construction of military roads, and in minor ways, such as
giving large orders for furniture for the Tuilleries. He was wise enough
to see that no restoration of the *ancien régime* was possible, and so
made no such foolish attempt, for he saw that order could only be
restored on the assumption that those in possession of the land were
confirmed in their ownership. With the law passed by the Convention
enacting that all estates should be divided up at death equally among
the children of the owner he did not interfere, nor with many other
useful measures which had been enacted during the Revolution, such as
the establishment of the metric system and the creation of important
colleges. Indeed, all through the Revolution, much useful work of this
kind was done by technical committees, in which the majority of the
members of the Assemblies took refuge in order to escape from the
political conflicts which threatened their lives.

The only statesman in history whose work may be compared with Napoleon
is Augustus, since he undertook the task of reorganizing the Roman
Empire after the Civil Wars as Napoleon did France after the Revolution.
They both had recourse to similar methods of government. Both sought a
solution in the organization of a highly centralized bureaucracy. Though
we have no love for bureaucracy, we yet must recognize that when the
traditions of a country have been destroyed there is no other way of
delivering it from anarchy, and the popularity of the Napoleonic regime
is a sure witness that though it was despotic it could not have been so
intolerable as that which the people had endured during the Revolution.

The French Revolution does not appear to me to be a thing to be defended
or denounced, but to be studied, for it is a rich field for the study of
economics and psychology. We should aim at understanding it in order
that we may profit by its mistakes. The convulsions of the Revolution
were due to the fact that it attempted an impossible task. The
revolutionists thought society could be reconstructed anew on a purely
theoretical foundation, not understanding that the basis of every social
order is to be found in certain traditions, and that it is only possible
to reshape them within definite limits, for society can only exist by
imposing certain restraints, laws, manners and customs to constitute a
check upon the natural instincts of barbarism which never entirely
disappear. The revolutionary gospel of nature, by removing these
restraints, without which no society can exist, transformed a political
society into a barbarian horde, for, misled by Rousseau, they did not
understand that the aim of civilization was to escape from nature and
not to return to it. Hence it was that while the Revolution had its
moral sanction in the demand for the redress of certain definite social
grievances, the feeling of unrest was exploited by idealists and
theorists in an attempt to realize an unrealizable thing. Among other
things, the events of the Revolution gave the lie to what might be
called the spontaneous creation theory of democracy---the idea that the
will of the people is omnipotent and final---for democracy cannot
spontaneously create itself. Democracy will arrive when it knows how to
choose the right ideas and *not a day before*, for there is a law of
gravitation in human affairs which is as constant as the law of
gravitation in the physical universe, and which all who aspire to govern
society must obey. It was because the revolutionists did not understand
this that the Revolution ended by establishing not the sovereign people,
but a bureaucratic despotism.

It is remarkable how slow mankind is to learn by experience. A crisis
has overtaken the modern world which has many parallels with the crisis
which overtook France before the Revolution, and yet with the experience
of the French Revolution to guide us, there is little or no attempt to
learn the lessons which it has to teach. On the one hand we have a
governing class, crying "Peace, peace," when there is no peace, as
jealous of maintaining their privileges as the French nobility, and as
unwilling as them to meet the need of additional taxation and equally
blind to the inevitable consequences of their short-sightedness. On the
other hand, just as in France there was a movement of peasants groping
its way back to Medievalism demanding the Just Price, so we have a
popular movement on a similar quest demanding a fixed price and the
control of profiteers. Just as this movement back to Mediaevalism was
frustrated by the French intellectuals who exploited the popular unrest
in the interests of impossible ideals, so we have the Socialist Movement
doing just the same thing. For in all the big fundamental things there
is little to choose between the Socialists to-day and the French
Revolutionaries. Both have got their ideas upside down. Rousseau made
morality dependent upon Law, while Marx made it dependent upon economic
condition. In theory this is a difference; in practice it is not, for
both make morality dependent upon the maintenance of administrative
machinery. Both concentrate upon property and ignore currency. Both
search for a fool-proof State. And so it is in respect of the whole
range of Socialist ideas. They differ from Rousseau only in being one
degree further removed from reality; for Rousseau did realize that the
basis of society must rest upon agriculture, but Socialists to-day
appear to have forgotten it. The difference of their ideas regarding
property is a matter of minor importance, since the more they differ the
more they are alike. They are alike in their belief that evil resides
finally in institutions and not in men, and in their faith absolute in
the natural perfection of mankind.

# Capitalism and the Guilds

With the French Revolution and the wars that followed it there fell what
remained in Western Europe of the old Mediaeval Order. Henceforth
political thought no longer troubles itself with the issue of Church and
State but with Capitalism which becomes the dominating power in the
world. It will be necessary therefore for us, before proceeding further
with the political problem, to retrace our steps to watch the rise of
capitalist industry.

Capitalism, as we saw, had its origin in the growth of foreign trade,
which offered merchants abundant opportunities for making profits by the
manipulation of currency, unchecked by Guild regulations. But capitalist
exploitation began on the land, when the merchants began to invest the
wealth they had accumulated in land, and proceeded to convert tillage
into pasturage. That such a development was possible was due, as we saw,
to Roman Law, which corrupted the old Feudal order by instituting
private ownership in land. Apart from Roman Law, the Feudal system would
have been transformed, for the spread of currency into rural areas had
gradually undermined its old stability by substituting money payments
for payments in kind. But the fact that the transformation proceeded
from Feudalism to landlordism and capitalism instead of from Feudalism
to agricultural Guilds, which would have regulated currency by a system
of fixed prices such as obtained in the towns, was due entirely to Roman
Law, which, by instituting private property in land, paved the way to
capitalist exploitation. Roman Law, then, created capitalism, and
capitalism, we shall see, destroyed the Guilds.

From having commercialized agriculture, capitalists turned their
attention to the capture of industry. In the towns, capitalist
exploitation was impossible, for the detailed regulations of the Guilds
covered every condition of production. But outside of the towns in the
rural areas no such regulations existed. The capitalist there was at
liberty to do as he pleased. He could manufacture what he liked, use
inferior material, pay low wages and sell at whatever price he liked,
and there was no one to stop him. The capitalists who had taken to
sheep-farming were not long in turning such circumstances to their
advantage. They employed many of those whom they evicted from their
holdings in the manufacture of cloth and articles made from it. It was
thus there came into existence that "domestic system" of industry which
was destined to be the destruction of the Guilds. As early as the
fourteenth century the Guilds began to feel the competition of this
domestic industry. The Guildsmen complained that the goods so produced
were made of inferior material; that one master would employ many
journeymen, have too man} apprentices, and pay them a lower wage than
was allowed by the Guilds, while some trades, as, for instance, the
cappers and fullers, began to suffer from the competition of wares
produced by machinery driven by water-mills. This led to so much
impoverishment among the craftsmen of the towns that fulling-mills were
forbidden by statute in 1483.

Not only were the Guilds at a disadvantage in meeting such competition
owing to the high standard of quality which they existed to uphold, but
they were further handicapped by the fact that the towns came in for
taxation which manufacturers outside of the towns were able to escape.
"The pressure of the Apprenticeship Act of Henry IV, the heavy
assessment which they paid for the wars with France, and for Henry VII's
unnecessary exactions, and lastly, the regulations made by the Guilds
with regard to apprentices and journeymen, were all telling against the
old corporate towns; they were at a disadvantage as compared with
neighbouring villages, and there was in consequence a considerable
displacement of industry from old centres to new ones, or to
suburbs."During the fifteenth century a general decay of English towns
set in. Migration was no longer from the country to the towns, but from
the towns back to the country, and with this change there came the decay
of the Guilds which had grown up within the corporate towns.

There can be little doubt that the newer regulations of the Guilds which
were regarded as tyrannical, and which we hear of in the fifteenth
century, were brought about by the desire of those already in the Guilds
to protect themselves against the competition of the rising capitalist
industry. At an earlier date, it had been possible for every journey man
in the Guild to look forward to a day when he would be able to set up in
business on his own account as a master. But now, when the monopoly of
the Guilds was clearly breaking down before the rise of capitalist
industry, and the masters were beginning to feel the pressure of
competition, they began to frame regulations not with an eye to the
interests of the craft as a whole, which was beyond their power, but
solely to protect their own individual interests. Such undoubtedly was
the origin of the grievance of the journeymen, for which they obtained
redress in 1536, whereby, on becoming apprentices, they were made to
swear upon oath not to set up in business in the towns without the
consent and licence of the masters, wardens and fellowship of their
Guild, upon pain of forfeiting their freedom or like penalty. One of the
results of this restriction was to aggravate the tendency of journeymen
to withdraw from the towns and set up shop in the villages where they
were outside of Guild jurisdiction. To do this was often their only
chance of getting employment, for the competition of the rural
industries inclined the masters more and more to overstock their shops
with an undue proportion of apprentices.

The growth of such abuses demonstrated clearly that the craft Guilds
were breaking down before the rise of capitalist industry; and it became
evident that if industry was to continue to be subject to regulation,
the Guild system would need to be reorganized upon national lines, or,
in other words, that Guild regulation should be made co-extensive with
industry and the various local Guilds linked up or federated into
national ones. Some such general notion appears to have inspired the
attempts at Guild reorganization by Henry VII and Henry VIII, who tried
to get the Guilds placed entirely under the control of public
authorities by enacting that in the future all Guild ordinances should
be approved by the justices. This was the one reform which complainants
had demanded in 1376 and 1473, as well as from the Tudors. Subject to
such control, the Guilds were encouraged. But the measures they took
were altogether inadequate to cope with the economic situation which was
developing. Instead of seeking to establish a national system of Guilds,
they merely extended certain local privileges, giving certain Guilds the
right to search in rural areas within a certain radius of the towns.
Justices of the peace were to appoint searchers for the shires.

We can easily imagine why such measures were ineffective. Capitalism had
already got a firm foothold, and it could not be brought under control
except by the most determined action on the part of the authorities, and
justices of the peace would not be the kind of people to act in such a
way. If regulations are going to be enforced, those empowered to enforce
them must be made to suffer if they neglect in their duty, as is the
case with democratically constituted Guilds. Such Guilds might have been
established in the rural areas at the time of the Great Revolt. But the
opportunity which then presented itself was lost. The peasants threw
away their opportunity when they demanded the liberty to buy and sell
instead of the protection of Guilds, and now the problem was not such a
simple one. The development of foreign trade made the fixing and
regulating of prices an extremely difficult one, and nothing short of a
great popular movement demanding such reforms would have sufficed to
render such measures practicable. But no such movement existed. The
peasants, who had been driven off the land to make room for sheep,
resented the monopolies of the Guilds. They had no idea of the value of
their services in regulating currency, and welcomed action which removed
their monopoly.

The Guilds received their death-blow when they found themselves no
longer able to fix the prices of commodities, for everything turns upon
this. If prices can be fixed, then it is a comparatively easy matter to
enforce a standard of quality and maintain the internal discipline of
the Guilds, but if prices cannot be fixed, then a standard of quality
cannot be enforced, and the Guilds jurisdiction over their members tends
to become restricted within increasingly narrow limits. The Guilds found
themselves unable to determine prices during the sixteenth century. In
1503 they lost their autonomy in this respect, when it was enacted that
any change in the price of wares had to be "approved by the Chancellor,
Treasurer of England and Chief Justices of either Bench, or three of
them; or before both the Justices of Assizes in their circuit."But what
finally broke the monopoly of the Guilds was the growing desire of the
public to have prices fixed by *the haggling of the market*.No doubt
they had acquired this taste through buying the products of the
capitalist industry, which was subject to no regulation; and they came
to demand the same terms from the Guild masters, who, presumably,
suffering from competition, were unable to offer effective resistance.
But there was a deeper cause for the change. The moral sanction of the
Just Price had been undermined by the lawyers, who maintained the right
of every man to make the best bargain he could---a right which was
recognized in the Justinian Code. St. Thomas Aquinas, in challenging the
lawyers, defended the principle of the Just Price on purely moral
grounds. He failed altogether to perceive its economic significance,
contending that "human law can only prohibit what would break up
society. Other wrong acts it treats as quasi-lawful in the sense that
while not approving them, it does not punish them"--a strange conclusion
to come to, considering how ruthlessly profiteering all through the
Middle Ages was suppressed, and that failure to suppress it has in these
days nearly broken society up. It is thus we see the economic
significance of the Guilds was not understood, and they had no official
defenders.From this time onwards the Guilds lose their public functions.
In the seventeenth century, journeymen were excluded from their
membership, and they continue as societies of employers. Two or three,
even a dozen occupations, become united in one company (for they cease
to be called Guilds), which bears the name of the occupation followed by
the more influential citizens. Such companies continue to exist to this
day in old towns in the provinces, as well as in London, and have given
rise to the various Chambers of Commerce of our day. The property in the
possession of these companies to-day is the property that remained in
the possession of the Guilds after the confiscations made under the
Chantries Bill (1547), in the reign of Edward VI. This Bill did not
attack the Guilds as economic organizations, as is commonly supposed,
nor did it seek to confiscate the whole of the property of the Guilds,
but only such part of their revenues as had already been devoted to
certain specified religious purposes. A great part of their wealth had
been spent in providing masses for the souls of the deceased brethren,
and it was the lands whose revenues were spent on such purposes that
were confiscated. The revenues of the craft companies devoted to social
and charitable purposes remained with the Guilds. All the same "the
disendowment of religion in the mysteries evidently accelerated the
transformation of the system; for it removed one strong bond of union
among the members, and limited their common efforts to the range of
their material interests."

The Elizabethan Statute of Apprentices, passed in 1563, may perhaps be
regarded as an honest attempt to save something from the wreck. The
Mediaeval policy of regulating prices having broken down, it sought to
protect the position of the skilled worker from deteriorating under
competition.

"According to it no one could lawfully exercise, either as master or as
journeyman, any art, mystery, or manual occupation, except he had been
brought up therein seven years, at least, as an apprentice. Every
householder dwelling in a city, town-corporate or market town, might
take apprentices for seven years at least. But only those youths might
be taken as apprentices whose parents possessed a certain fortune; and
none could be bound but those who were under twenty-one years of age.
Whoever had three apprentices must keep one journeyman; and for every
other apprentice above three, one other journeyman. As to journeymen, it
was enacted that, in most trades, no person should retain a servant
under one whole year, and no servant was to depart or be put away but
upon a quarter's warning. The hours of work were fixed by the Act to
about twelve in summer, and from day-dawn till night in winter. Wages
were to be assessed yearly by the justices of the peace or the town
magistrates, at every general session first to be holden after Easter.
The same authorities were to settle all disputes between masters and
apprentices, and protect the latter.

Though this was, I believe, an honest attempt to protect the skilled
workers, its mischief lay in the power given to the justices of the
peace to determine wages, for in effect it handed the workers over to
the mercy of their employers. Thorold Rogers condemns it severely on
this account, affirming that it brought down wages to a bare
subsistence. All the same, the Act does not appear to have been
unpopular among the workers, for in the eighteenth century, when the
assessment of wages had fallen into disuse, and wages had begun to be
settled by competition, the workers in the skilled trades repeatedly
petitioned Parliament to compel the justices to carry out the
regulations as to apprentices, which they recognized would tend, by
limiting the number practising a particular craft, to keep up the
standard of wages. When year after year, notwithstanding all the
petitions of the workmen, the Acts regulating woollen manufacture were
suspended, a factory was burnt down; and in September, 1805, the London
Fire Insurance Companies received letters of caution from workmen,
wherein they declared that as Parliament refused to protect their rights
they would do it themselves.\" It was determined action of this kind
that brought the whole question to a head and led to the repeal of the
statute in the woollen trade in 1806, and for all trades in 1814. And
this, in spite of the fact that in petitions presented to Parliament
300,000 were for the maintenance of the statute and only 2,000 for its
repeal.

The repeal of this statute declared the state of industrial
disorganization and disorder as the only lawful state. This state became
only too soon the prevailing one in all trades. Parliamentary reports on
the condition of the ribbon trade and the silk manufacture at Coventry,
Nuneaton, and Macclesfield describe as the immediate consequence of the
repeal, such a growth of the system of sweaters and half-pay
apprentices, that the journeymen were driven to famine, and the female
workers to prostitution. "Whilst the statute of the 5th Elizabeth was in
force," says the report, "the distressing circumstances now complained
of never occurred." The whole of the masters and weavers therefore
petitioned in 1818 for the extension of the Spitalfields Acts to the
silk trade in the said places. Reports of the year 1817 and 1818 give an
absolutely identical account of the condition of the watchmakers at
Coventry. Further, as the justices of the peace no longer assessed wages
after having heard masters and men, the workmen now endeavoured to
introduce regulation of wages by statement-lists of prices, agreed upon
by masters and men. But they were violated upon every occasion by the
employers. The words which Pitt spoke on the subject of the Arbitration
Act were now completely fulfilled. "The time will come," he said, "when
manufactures will have been so long established, and the operatives not
having any other business to flee to, that it will be in the power of
any one man in a town to reduce the wages, and all the other
manufacturers must follow. If ever it does arrive at this pitch,
Parliament, if it be not then sitting, ought to be called together, and
if it cannot redress your grievances its power is at an end. Tell me not
that Parliament cannot---it is omnipotent to protect." The workmen were
quite of the opinion of Pitt, and numberless were the petitions which,
after 1814, they addressed to Parliament for the legal regulation of
their trades. But as Parliament thought it could not redress their
grievances, they tried self-help. After the repeal of the Act of
Elizabeth, combinations and unions therefore arose in all trades. But
whilst, on the one hand, the workmen were refused legal protection,
self-help, in consequence of the 39th and 40th George III, c. 106, was
considered a crime. In 1818, bail to the amount of 200 and two sureties
for 100 each were required for the appearance of a common workman at the
next session to answer a charge of combining. The greatest mischief was,
however, that the Combination Laws, by confounding right and wrong, led
men to regard with less aversion things really vicious. The people, in
their despair, did not shrink from the greatest deeds of violence and
the most infamous crimes in self-defence.\"

The consequence of these acts of violence was that in 1825 the
Combination Laws were repealed. A London Radical, Francis Place, having
by dexterously stage-managing the evidence given before a Royal
Commission, succeeded in persuading the Government that Trade Unions
owed their existence entirely to the irritation caused by the
Combination Laws and that they would disappear with their repeal.
Workmen were not granted full liberty of association, but a
half-liberty. They were allowed to combine to determine rates of wages
and hours of labour, but they were not allowed to limit the number of
apprentices or to prevent piecework. Six months hard labour was to be
imposed on any one who should resort to violence, threats, molestation
or obstruction in order to secure a rise of wages. The judges
interpreted this clause as extending to workmen on strike who reproached
other workmen for continuing to labour, thus making picketing illegal.
They also decided that Trade Unions had no legal position, could not
hold title to property nor maintain actions in the courts in defence of
their rights. These grievances, along with a law which discriminated
between the penalties meted out to employer and employee in the event of
either breaking a contract, were removed by the Trade Union Act of 1871,
which gave the Unions legal recognition. But it was not out of any
largeness of heart of the employers, or any political insight of the
governing class, that such status was given, but because an outbreak of
working-class violence in Sheffield had led them to suppose that the
existing law, by denying legal status to the Unions, tended rather to
provoke than to repress violent action. It was thus at last the
principles of Roman Law were successfully challenged, and the lie given
to the Roman theory that only by sapping every tie between man and man
could stability be given to the State.

In these days we recognize in the Trade Union Movement the first step
towards a restoration of the Guilds. Already the Unions, with their
elaborate organizations, exercise many of the functions which were
formerly performed by the Guilds---such as the regulation of wages and
hours of labour, in addition to the more social duty of giving timely
help to the sick and unfortunate. Like the Guilds, the Unions have grown
from small beginnings until they now control whole trades. Like the
Guilds also, they are not political creations, but voluntary
organizations which have arisen spontaneously to protect the weaker
members of society against the oppression of the more powerful. They
differ from them as industrial organizations only to the extent that,
not being in possession of industry and of corresponding privileges,
they are unable to accept responsibility for the quality of work done,
and to regulate the prices. But these differences are the differences
inherent in a stage of transition, and will disappear as the Unions
trespass on the domains of the capitalist.

# Political and Economic Thought After the Reformation

By the end of the sixteenth century capitalism had triumphed. Not only
had it succeeded in capturing agriculture and entirely undermining the
position of the Guilds, but it had come to exercise a preponderating
influence in the counsels of the State. The way for its advance in
England had been opened by Henry VIII, who found himself compelled to
create a new aristocracy out of the capitalists in order to destroy the
power of the Church. It was not long after the political arrival of this
new aristocracy that there came a new valuation of political and
economic philosophy.

During the Middle Ages the theory obtained that national prosperity and
well-being had its foundation in agriculture rather than commerce. Work
and not wealth or property was the bestower of all worth and dignity.
Mediaeval economists deprecated any politico-economic movement that
encouraged the people to give up the pursuit of agriculture for trade
and commerce. Thus we read:--

"Among manual industries none stood higher in the estimation of the
Canon Law than agriculture. It was looked upon as the mother and
producer of all social organization and all culture, as the fosterer of
all other industries, and consequently as the basis of national
well-being. The Canon Law exacted special consideration for agriculture,
and partly for this reason, that it tended in a higher degree than any
other branch of labour to teach those who practised it godly fear and
uprightness. 'The farmer,' so it is written in *A Christian Admonition*,
'must in all things be protected and encouraged, for all depends on his
labour, from the Emperor to the humblest of mankind, and his handiwork
is in particular honourable and well-pleasing to God.' Therefore both
the spiritual and the secular law protect him.\"

"Next to agriculture came handiwork. 'This is praiseworthy in the sight
of God, especially in so far as it represents necessary and useful
things.' And when the articles are made with care and art, then both God
and men take plea sure in them; and it is good and true work when
artistic men, by the skill and cunning of their hands, in beautiful
building and sculpture, spread the glory of God and make men gentle in
their spirits, so that they find delight in beautiful things, and look
reverently on all art and handicraft as a gift of God for use,
enjoyment, and edification of man kind."

"Trade and commerce were held in lower esteem. 'An honourable merchant,'
says Trithemius, 'who does not only think of large profits, and who is
guided in all his dealings by the laws of God and man, and who gladly
gives to the needy of his wealth and earnings, deserves the same esteem
as any other worker. But it is no easy matter to be always honourable in
mercantile dealings, and with the increase of gain not to become
avaricious. Without commerce no community, of course, can exist, but
immoderate commerce is rather hurtful than beneficial, because it
fosters greed of gain and gold, and enervates and emasculates the nation
through love of pleasure and luxury.'"

"The Canonical writers did not think it was conducive to the well-being
of the people that the merchants 'like spiders should everywhere collect
together and draw every thing into their webs.' With the ever-increasing
growth and predominance of the mercantile spirit before their eyes, they
were sufficiently justified in their condemnation of the tyranny and
iniquity of trade which, as St. Thomas Aquinas had already said, made
all civic life corrupt, and by the casting aside of good faith and
honesty opened the door wide to fraudulence; while each one thought only
of his personal profit without regard to the public good."

This attitude towards social questions came to an end at the
Reformation, when, with the destruction of the Church, power passed
entirely into the hands of the capitalists who came to dominate the
State. The political philosophy which gradually came into existence
under their auspices looks at things from a very different angle. It
makes no attempt to interpret society in the light of the principle of
function, to conceive of society as a whole the parts of which are
organically related to each other. There is little or no attempt on the
part of Government to protect the interest of the labourer; to take
measures to see that the fruits of his labour are secured for him. On
the contrary, regard is paid only to the interests of the merchant,
while the labourer is left to shift for himself as best he can, with
only such doubtful protection as the Statute of Apprentices gave to the
town workers. Though the claims of agriculture were not altogether
neglected, yet the tendency in the long run was for statesmen and
theorists to exalt manufacturers above agriculture and exchange above
production. This came about because it was through foreign trade that
the money was made which was the main source of revenue to the State and
because there was a general tendency in the thought of the governing and
merchant classes to identify money with wealth. The governing class of
capitalists with their henchmen the lawyers consisted no longer of men
capable of taking large and comprehensive views of society, but of men
whose minds were entirely preoccupied with its material aspects. They
concentrated all their attention upon finding ways and means to increase
the wealth of the nation but for reasons perhaps best known to
themselves they chose to ignore the problem as to how it was to be
distributed.

External circumstances favoured the growth of this point of view in the
governing class. The suppression of the monasteries had been followed by
a period of great economic depression, when the people felt the pressure
of poverty. There was great dislocation of industry everywhere and a
debased coinage had not improved matters. The low-water mark was reached
during the reign of Edward VI. Under Elizabeth things were lifted out of
the mire and the country rescued from economic stagnation and depression
by the encouragement given to manufacturers and foreign trade. The
popularity of Elizabeth---for in spite of her religious persecutions she
was popular---was due to the fact that the support she gave to the
policy of William Cecil, Lord Burghley, had the effect towards the close
of her reign of restoring the national prosperity. Immediately the
policy of Burghley was prompted by the likelihood of a war with Spain.
England had become Protestant, and as she had hitherto been dependent
for war material both as regards gunpowder and the metals necessary for
the making of ordnance upon supplies that came from ports controlled by
the Roman Catholic Powers, it was urgent if she was to retain her
independence for her to have a supply of her own. Every means therefore
was taken to foster the manufacture of munitions of war at home, and to
such an extent was the effort successful that when at last the storm
burst and the Spanish Armada sailed for England, it was found that the
leeway had been entirely made up and that English guns were as good if
not better than those of Spain.

But the new policy did not end here. Agriculture was encouraged for
military as well as for economic reasons. Measures were taken to make
tillage as profitable as pasturage by removing the embargo upon the
export of grain, while enclosures were stopped. The fishing trades were
supported not merely for the wealth they produced but as a school of
seamanship to train men for the mercantile and naval marine. These
things did much to mitigate the evil of unemployment which had become so
chronic under previous reigns, but further measures were taken to deal
with it definitely and to diffuse a general prosperity by the
establishment of a great number of new industries that made goods in
England which hitherto had only been obtainable from abroad. Industries
for the manufacture of hardware, sailcloth, glass-paper, starch, soap
and other commodities of common consumption were successfully
established. Mines also were opened. The assistance of German engineers
was called in for this. A new method of pumping which they had invented
made mining a more practicable and commercial proposition.

The circumstances of the age were particularly favourable to these new
developments. The religious wars in the Netherlands and elsewhere led to
the emigration of great numbers of skilled workmen, who found a haven of
refuge in England and brought a technical knowledge of new industries
with them. Moreover, there was the change of trade routes so favourable
to English industry. During the Middle Ages these routes had been
overland, and it was this circumstance that brought such prosperity to
the Hanseatic towns of Germany whose central European position was then
so enviable. But with the invention of the mariner's compass, the
discovery of America and the sea route to India, overland trade routes
gave place to sea routes, and this took prosperity away from the
Hanseatic and other inland towns and countries and transferred it to
seaports and countries with a good seaboard. This transformation, which
occupied the space of about fifty years, was very profitable to English
merchants and manufacturers, who now began to secure a larger share of
the commerce of the world, and helped enormously to restore the national
prosperity.

It would have been a fortunate thing for England if the political
speculation which accompanied these changes had kept its mental balance
and reconciled in their true proportions the old with the new. But
unfortunately such was not the case. Prosperity had been restored not by
efforts to re-establish justice in the internal ordering of society but
by seizing the opportunities which a period of economic transition
afforded for the making of money. And so faith in the old order tended
to decline while confidence in the new increased. Capitalism had been
able to restore prosperity, and so the opinions of capitalists came to
weigh more and more in the counsels of the State. Success in the new
order depended upon adaptability, and so the opinion grew that a country
lived not by its wisdom or its justice but by its wits. The State, which
during the Middle Ages had concerned itself exclusively with the
functions of military protection and the administration of the law, and
since the reign of Henry VIII had made itself responsible for the
religious life of the people, now began to concern itself with the
promotion of industry and commerce. According to the new dispensation,
wealth, or to be more strictly correct, bullion, was the great alchemy.
Success in the race for wealth was the precursor of all other desirable
things. Hence it was the first concern of the State to see to it that
there was always a large store of the precious metal on hand. To achieve
this end, considered of such vital importance, every expedient was
considered legitimate. The Government might prohibit the import or
export of certain commodities. This industry was to be encouraged to
export by subsidizing it with bounties, that was to be discouraged by
the imposition of duties. Charters were granted giving private
monopolies to certain companies. The test of success was to show a
balance of trade in favour of the nation and an increase in the gold
reserve. This system of the control of production and exchange by the
State is known as Mercantilism. It is, as its name implies the
interpretation, of national policy in the terms of the counting-house.
Its defect was that it placed the State at the mercy of vested interests
and was a source of political corruption, while it became a fruitful
source of wars. In the Middle Ages wars had been territorial and
dynastic. Now they became economic and were fought over tariffs,
concessions and privileges. It was the inevitable consequence of the
defeat of the Guilds, which, changing the ideal of industry from a
qualitative to a quantitative one, necessarily brought those who pursued
it in collision with economic interests beyond the seas. The wars with
the Dutch were deliberately provoked by the Navigation Act, which
prohibited the importation in foreign vessels of any but the products of
the countries to which they belonged. It was intended to strike a fatal
blow at the carrying trade of the Dutch from which they drew their
wealth and to secure our supremacy on the seas; and it was successful.
The Mercantilists clearly grasped the fundamental economic fact, that
under competitive conditions of industry the commercial advantage of one
country is often only to be obtained at the expense of another, and that
"Trade follows the flag," as Conservatives believe to this day.
Mercantilism is not dead, it is the living faith of the commercial
classes to-day in all countries of the world. Free Traders in these days
are unwilling to face the unpleasant fact that the terms of the economic
struggle are laid down by law and maintained by force, though Adam Smith
did say, "As defence is of much more importance than opulence, the Act
of Navigation is, perhaps, the wisest of all the regulations of
England." People who believe in commercialism ought to believe in
militarism. If one of these is to be deprecated, then the other is. To
believe in commercialism and regret militarism is to live in a world of
unrealities, as Free Traders in these days are finding out.

Mercantilism was not a social theory but a commercial policy evolved by
men who were satisfied to assume that a policy which suited their own
immediate interests must be good for society. It began its career during
the reign of James I, when Gerard Malynes, a specialist in currency,
whose advice on mercantile affairs was often sought by the Privy
Council, set forth his views in a series of pamphlets in which he urged
the Government to forbid the export of bullion. The idea was a Mediaeval
one, and is altogether unintelligible apart from the Mediaeval system of
thought, which, refusing to divorce economies from moral considerations,
placed the maintenance of the social order before the interests of
capital and trade. Viewing the social and economic evils which
accompanied the growth of foreign trade, it was but natural that the
Medievalists, like Aristotle, should regard its increase with alarm and
suspicion and seek to put obstructions in the path of its advance, and
that the support of the State should be secured for obstructionist
tactics by the convenient theory that armies and fleets could only be
maintained in distant countries if there is money to pay for them, and
that such money would not be forthcoming when wanted if bullion were
exported from the country. But Malynes, writing at a later date, urged
his case upon other grounds---that as exchange implied value for value,
the operation of the exchanges defrauded the revenue.

Taking his stand upon such purely technical grounds, the first
Mercantilists found no difficulty in refuting him. If the increase of
foreign trade was a good and desirable thing quite apart from how the
increased wealth was distributed---and in official quarters this
assumption was taken for granted---then the Mercantilists were easily
able to show that restrictions on the export of bullion impeded the
growth of foreign trade. "They represented, first, that the exportation
of gold and silver, in order to purchase foreign goods, did not always
diminish the quantity of those metals in the kingdom. That, on the
contrary, it might frequently increase that quantity; because if the
consumption of foreign goods was not thereby increased in the country,
those goods might be re-exported to foreign countries, and, being there
sold for a large profit, might bring back much more treasure than was
originally sent out to purchase them."Thomas Mun, who is sometimes
described as the founder of Mercantilism and whose treatise *England's
Treasure in Foreign Trade* which, often reprinted during the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, retained almost canonical authority until it
was displaced by *The Wealth of Nations*, declared that "Money begets
trade and trade increases money." He compared the operations of foreign
trade to the seed-time and harvest of agriculture. "If we only behold,"
he says, "the actions of the husbandman in the seed-time, when he
casteth away much good corn unto the ground, we shall account him rather
a madman than a husbandman. But when we consider his labours in the
harvest, which is the end of his endeavours, we shall find the worth and
plentiful increase of his actions."

The sub-title of the treatise declares that \" the balance of our
foreign trade is the rule of Treasury,\" and the object is declared to
be to exhibit the means by which a kingdom may be enriched. "The
ordinary means to increase our wealth and treasure is by foreign trade,
wherein we must ever observe this rule---to sell more to strangers
yearly than we consume of theirs in value. For that part of our stock
which is not returned to us in wares must necessarily be brought home in
treasure." Every effort must therefore be devoted to increase our
exports and to decrease our consumption of foreign commodities. Waste
land should be used to grow hemp, flax and other articles which are now
imported. We might also diminish our imports if we would lessen our
demand for foreign wares in diet and raiment. The vagaries and excesses
of fashion might be corrected by adopting sumptuary laws prevailing in
other countries. "If in our raiment we will be prodigal, let this be
done by our own manufactures, where the success of the rich may be the
employment of the poor, whose labours, notwithstanding, would be more
profitable if they were done to the use of strangers." We may charge a
high price for articles which our neighbours need and which no other
country can supply; but those of which we do not possess the monopoly
must be sold as cheap as possible. Foreign materials worked up in
England for export should be duty free. Our exports should be carried in
our own ships, and our fisheries should be developed. Writing as a
Director of the East India Company, Mun pronounced our trade with the
East Indies the most profitable of our commercial activities, not only
because we obtain its products cheaply for ourselves, but because we
sell the surplus at a high price to our neighbours. This \" may well
stir up our utmost endeavours to maintain and enlarge this great and
noble business, so much importing the public wealth, strength and
happiness.\"

Such was the faith of Mercantilism as it was most widely accepted. Apart
from what he has to say about sumptuary laws, which has a
fifteenth-century ring about it, it is the same faith as that of the
average commercial man to-day. Subsequent writers sought to widen out
the Mercantile theory. They deprecated the exaggerated importance given
to foreign trade and emphasized the importance of home markets and
agriculture. Rejecting the notion that the national wealth depended on
cash, they maintained that goods paid for goods and that nature and
labour were the ultimate source of wealth. To this extent their thought
showed a reversion towards the Mediaeval point of view. But on the other
hand they were modernist, being the forerunners of the Free Traders.
They attacked the elaborate system of prohibitions, duties, bounties and
monopolies as an impediment rather than an encouragement to trade.
Dudley North anticipated Adam Smith when he declared, "The world as to
trade is but as one nation, and nations are but as persons. No trade is
unprofitable to the public; for if any prove so, men leave it off; and
wherever the trader thrives the public thrives also." Charles Davanent,
another of the school, maintained that loss by balance in one trade may
cause profit in another. "Trade," he says, "is in its own nature free,
finds its own channel, and best directeth its own course." But he
forgets that the same arguments may be turned against him. For while it
is true that trade when untrammelled will find its own channel, it does
not follow that the channel it finds is a socially desirable one; for
while loss in one trade may cause profit in another, one man is called
to bear the loss while another gets the profits, resulting in an unequal
distribution of wealth that is any thing but socially advantageous.

The next development of Mercantilism is associated with the name of Adam
Smith. I call it the next development because though it is true the
Manchester School reversed the economic maxims of the Mercantilists, yet
finally they only differed from them to the extent of carrying their
ideas to their logical conclusion. The Mercantile theory of Mun was a
theory of the business of making money by foreign trade. As such it
provided a theory or policy for a group of interests which it assumed
was in the public interest, but it took no particular pains to explain
how and why. The Free Traders who followed him attempted to give the
theory a wider application, demanding the abolition of privileges in
trade. But they went little further than making this demand. To secure
acceptance for such proposals something more was needed. Free Trade
would remain unacceptable as an administrative proposal so long as
political and economic thought was dominated largely by Mediaeval
preconceptions, and it became necessary, therefore, to secure
acceptation for the Free Trade policy to undermine what remained of
Mediaeval political and economic thought. This was the work of Adam
Smith. To the Mediaeval idea of privileges for all he opposed the idea
of the abolition of all privileges and unfettered individual competition
which he associated with the gospel of Free Trade. To the Mediaeval idea
of the Just Price he opposed the idea that prices were best settled by
competition. "To buy in the cheapest market and to sell in the dearest"
was a policy calculated to secure the greatest good of the greatest
number. But such economic principles were incompatible with the
Mediaeval and Christian ideal of human unselfishness. Then, concluded
Adam Smith, such principles had no relevance in economics. Not
unselfishness but enlightened self-interest was the ideal to be aimed
at.

In his *Theory of Moral Sentiments* Adam Smith postulates the doctrine
of sympathy as the real bond between human beings in their ethical
relations. But in the *Wealth of Nations* he makes it clear that human
sympathy has no place in economic relationships. "It is not from the
benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker," he tells us,
"that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own
self-interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity, but to their
self-love, and never talk to them of our necessities, but of their
advantage." This perverted attitude of mind permeates the whole of Adam
Smith's writings. According to him the public well-being was secured,
not by the assertion of communal interests, by the subordination of
individual interests to those of the community, but by the deliberate
removal of all economic restraints in order that each individual might
be at liberty to pursue his own selfish ends without let or hindrance.
*Laissez-faire*, *laissez passer* was the key to unlock all economic
problems, the sole panacea for all human ills, the only hope of social
regeneration. Give free play to enlightened self-interest and natural
liberty, and prosperity would soon shine in all its splendour on every
department of the national life, for the effect of urging each
individual to pursue his interests under a system of unfettered
individual competition would be to so stimulate trade and cheapen
production that there would soon be plenty for all and to spare.

That Adam Smith should have been hailed as a prophet can only be
explained on the hypothesis that the moral tone of society had already
reached its nadir ere he wrote. Ruskin's allusion to him as \" the
half-bred and half-witted Scotchman who taught the deliberate blasphemy:
Thou shalt hate the Lord thy God, damn His laws and covet thy
neighbour's goods,\" was well deserved, and is not the less true because
he was sufficiently cunning to wrap up his devilish advice in language
of plausible sophistry instead of presenting it in the raw. The apology
of all who act as Adam Smith would have them do is that they take the
world as they find it, but they conceal the fact that they are content
to leave it worse than they found it. Of no one is this truer than of
Adam Smith. He was the pioneer of that economic fatalism which during
its fifty years of power paralysed society. In the hands of his
followers all his half-hearted qualifications were torn away and
political economy became the rigid soulless doctrine of every man for
himself and the devil take the hindermost, and all sympathy for the
exploited was strangled by the Ricardian "iron law of wages." That
Ruskin entirely annihilated the brazen doctrine in the first three pages
of *Unto this Last*, published in 1862, by exposing the fallacy
underlying the method of reasoning of the Manchester economists, any one
with an ounce of logic in his composition is well aware. Yet in spite of
this it showed no signs of weakening until its most distinguished
adherent, John Stuart Mill, disowned the superstition seven years
afterwards, in 1869.

Apologists of Adam Smith urge in his defence that the governing class
took only so much from his teaching as suited them and ignored the rest,
and he is therefore not to be blamed for the misinterpretation or
misapplication of his principles. While this plea may be urged in
defence of other men, it cannot be urged in the case of Adam Smith. Most
pioneers of thought have to complain that their followers have been true
to the letter of their advice while their spirit has been neglected, but
the governing class were true to the spirit of Adam Smith's gospel if
not to the letter. If Adam Smith really thought that he could on the one
hand urge individuals to pursue their own selfish interests and at the
same time forgo in the public interest any privileges they might
possess, he is to be regarded as a fool of the first order, half-witted
as Ruskin called him, entirely destitute of any understanding of the
human psychology, for the heartless competition to which he condemned
those without privileges made those who possessed privileges cling to
them more tenaciously than ever.

But the evil of Adam Smith's gospel does not end with the fact that it
confirmed the governing class in the pursuit of their own selfish
interests; it operated to force the working class to pursue the same
policy in self-defence. Hence the theory of Adam Smith leads logically
to that of Marx. The doctrine of individualism leads inevitably to that
of the Class War, which is the natural and inevitable rebellion of the
masses against a governing class that has become, in the words of Sir
Thomas More, "a certain conspiracy of rich men procuring their own
commodities under the name and title of the Common Wealth."

# The Industrial Revolution

In the latter half of the eighteenth century there was inaugurated a
series of changes in methods of production which gradually changed
England from being a country mainly rural and agricultural into one
largely urban and industrial. The period of transition is known as the
Industrial Revolution, and is roughly dated from about 1770 to 1840,
though of course these dates are entirely arbitrary inasmuch as industry
had been moving in this direction for at least the two preceding
centuries, while the development and expansion of the forces then set in
motion have continued ever since. But it was during those years that the
really dramatic changes were made. In 1769 Watts made the steam engine
of Newcomen into a really practical and commercial thing by the
introduction of a separate condenser, and this invention was the central
agency for transforming industry from a basis of handicraft to machine
production. Meanwhile the textile industry was becoming rapidly
mechanized. In 1730 Kay invented the flying shuttle; in 1770 Hargreaves
the spinning jenny. Arkwright, Compton and Cartwright followed with
their inventions which made possible the application of steam power to
textile production. The ball was now fairly set rolling; inventions in
one trade promoted inventions in another. The inventions of the cotton
industry were adapted to the woollen and linen trades, to hosiery, silk
and lace-making. First one trade and then another succumbed to the new
inventions until in our day this tendency has reached its climax in the
growth of automatic machinery to which the war gave such an impetus.

For some time before the Industrial Revolution burst upon the world
industry had been becoming more mechanical. The introduction into the
workshops of the system of the division of labour in the seventeenth
century by splitting up the handicrafts into simple detailed operations
paved the way for change. For as machinery in its infancy was only
capable of performing separate and simplified operations, it is evident
that so long as all the operations necessary to production in any of the
handicrafts were the work of a skilled handicraftsman machinery could
make very little headway. But when the individual labourer was confined
in his operations to a single simple mechanical task, the road was paved
for the introduction of machinery by simplifying the problem of the
inventor.

This change from a qualitative to a quantitative basis for industry was
not introduced without a considerable amount of opposition, which came
both from above and from below. The craftsmen hated it, and it is safe
to say the change would never have been made but for the defeat of the
Guilds, since so long as the workers retained any control over the
conditions of their employment they would resist changes in production
which destroyed pleasure in work and involved their personal
degradation. The instinct of the craftsman is always against factory
production. There is no *Mediaeval prejudice* about this, for in this
respect craftsmen have not changed since the Middle Ages. The hand-loom
weavers refused to go into the factories in Lancashire, though the wages
were higher, because they hated the discipline of the factories and felt
it a moral sur render to accept voluntarily such conditions of
servitude. "Although to the authors of the books on the advantages of
machinery, invention seemed to have lightened the drudgery of men and
women, it had introduced a wearing tension; the nervous strain of
watching machinery and working with machinery aged men and women faster
than the heaviest physical exertions."Every craftsman instinctively
knows this, and it is this that lies at the bottom of their hatred of
machinery. The class to-day, as at the time of the Industrial
Revolution, which is most certain of the benefits of machinery is the
class the farthest removed from it, who profit by the conveniences it
brings them and who are not called upon to support its burden. As the
class which was required to attend machinery viewed the matter
otherwise, it is apparent that its introduction pre supposes the
existence of a slave class in society that can be exploited. Indeed, it
was from such a class that the first factory operatives came. "There
were three main disturbances of the regular life of the time to account
for the great stream of population into Lancashire and the adjacent
counties. There was, first, the agrarian revolution in England,
dispossessing a large number of small agriculturists and breaking down
the life and economy of the old village. There was, secondly, the
congestion of Ireland and the acute distress caused by the exaction? of
an absentee landlord-class. There was, in the third place, the long war;
the disbanding of a huge army let loose a flood of men whose ties with
their own homes were broken. The building of canals and bridges helped
to make labour more mobile, and these enterprises drew people to the
districts where labour was wanted for the factories."

Until the middle of the seventeenth century the efforts of the workers
to resist mechanical innovations found support in high quarters. It is
well known that the Tudors were consistently opposed to the introduction
of machinery which was injurious to handicraftsmen or would lower the
standard of quality in the articles produced. For a long period they
appear to have regarded machinery with the same hostility as did the
Luddites in the early years of the nineteenth century. Inventive genius
was then termed "subtle imagination," and any substitute for the
manufacture by hands and feet was regarded as the ruin of the industry
concerned. For this reason the fulling mill in 1482, the gig mill in
1552, and the tucking mill in 1555 were discountenanced. The advisers of
Edward VI and Elizabeth, though they encouraged foreign trade, were
equally opposed to mechanical innovations. James I and Charles I assumed
the same attitude. They stood by the handicraftsmen and insisted that
manufacturers should not dismiss their workmen owing to fluctuations of
trade which had been artificially created by themselves in their pursuit
of a quantitative ideal in production. Next to keeping men in
employment, the chief object which the first of the Stuarts set before
themselves was the maintenance of a high standard of quality in the
goods produced, and for this purpose they sought to arrest that steady
deterioration of quality in wares which had followed the defeat of the
Guilds, by providing supervision for existing industries.

For a long time the opposition was successful in checking the mechanical
tendency in industry. But it was broken down finally by the combined
influence of two forces---the growth of foreign trade and the Puritan
Movement. The discovery of America had provided England with an
apparently inexhaustible market for its commodities. This removed the
economic objection to change by providing an outlet for the surplus
products which accompanied efforts to place production on a quantitative
basis. As the fear of unemployment was diminished the opposition was
deprived of its strongest argument---the only one perhaps that would
carry any weight with the middle-class Puritans, who were now becoming
such a power in the land, and who joined with the landlords to overthrow
Charles at the Civil War. With the defeat of Charles the old order came
to an end. Nothing now stood in the way of business and enter prise,
sweating and mechanical industry. The mind of the Puritan was hard and
mechanical, devoid alike of any love of beauty or human sympathy. The
Puritans were in the main recruited from the trading classes of the
community, and denounced the restrictions which Charles imposed on
machinery as an interference with personal liberty. Any thought of
putting a boundary to mechanical development was to them insufferable
tyranny, and there can be little doubt that the attitude of the Stuarts
towards machinery and their attempts to stem the tide of capitalist
industry was a chief contributory cause of the Civil War. Their
interferences naturally gave rise to discontent among men whose ruling
passion was that of avarice and whose natures were so corrupted as to
exalt this besetting sin of theirs to the level of a virtue, celebrated
at a later day by Samuel Smiles. This perversion of the nature of the
Puritan is to be attributed to the fact that he denied himself all the
normal pleasures of life. He was cruel to himself, and so he found no
difficulty in being cruel to others, especially when it was of
assistance to him in the making of money.

It was because the Industrial Revolution was dominated by the Puritan
spirit that it was so relentless in its cruelty. When we read of the
terrible conditions of factory life in Lancashire during this period, of
workers locked in factories, of the heartless exploitation of women and
young children, of the ceaseless day and night work, of children working
by relays and sleeping in filthy beds that were never allowed to cool,
of weary hands and feet following rapidly the quick movements of the
never-tiring machines, we realize that it was dominated by men who had
become dehumanized, and that the personal independence of the workers
must have entirely disappeared, for no class of human beings would
consent to submit to such conditions who retained a scrap of
independence. It was not until 1832 that the factory working day was
reduced to twelve hours and to ten hours in 1847. It was not without
good reason that at Ashton in 1831 it was declared \" that the negroes
were slaves in name but the factory employees were slaves in reality.\"

What happened in England appears to have happened wherever industrialism
has been introduced. The Prussian Government deliberately dispossessed
the Polish peasantry of their lands in order to ensure a cheap supply of
labour for their factories. America still exploits the cheap labour of
Eastern Europeans, while until quite recently child labour was exploited
in the cotton mills of the Southern States almost as mercilessly as it
was in England before the passing of the Factory Acts. The Swadeshi
Movement is closely associated with the introduction of Industrialism
into India, and under its auspices the same evils are being created.
Just what the factory system is beginning to mean for India is to be
inferred from a recent report of the Indian Factory Commission: "In
daylight mills the average working time for the whole year is twelve
hours and five minutes; in mills fitted with electric light thirteen to
thirteen and a half hours." But the Commissioners say "in some provinces
the law is ignored to an extent not hitherto imagined. The law referring
to the half-hour's recess is generally disregarded in rice mills,
grinding factories and flour mills throughout India." In Bombay the
factory operatives inhabit slums of the most wretched character, crowded
and insanitary. Indeed, India appears to be light-heartedly plunging
into the sufferings which are the inevitable accompaniment of factory
production.

Nowadays the Industrial system encompasses us on all sides, and the
question may be asked, Has the system come to stay or are the
difficulties in which it finds itself to-day the beginning of the end?
If the answer to this question depended upon votes I doubt not there
would be an overwhelming majority in favour of its retention, for the
mass of people to-day are so much a part of the system as to be
incapable of understanding how the needs of society could be met apart
from our huge machinery. They fail altogether to realize that in the
fifteenth century the wages of the town artisan worked out at six or
seven times the cost of his board, and the agricultural labourer earned
two-thirds of this amount. Though nearly everybody is dissatisfied with
the present order of society, very few people suspect that there is any
connection between the evils they deplore and industrial methods of
production. Others, realizing that the social problem preceded the
Industrial Revolution, are disposed to dismiss the industrial problem as
a false issue. Neither our own nor future generations, they contend, can
escape the influence of modern technology.

Now quite apart from the issue as to whether modern technology is
entitled to the respect with which it is customary to regard it, it is
manifest that it has been reared on a base of social and economic
injustice and that it is maintained to-day by a highly complex system of
finance. It follows, therefore, that any change which threatens this
basis must react on the technology. If the highly complex system of
finance were to break down, as it already shows signs of doing, modern
technology would be involved in the catastrophe. A very few years of
social confusion and the fabric of technology would be in pieces. For
whereas a simple or primitive technology can speedily recover from
violent upheavals, a highly complex and artificial one cannot, because
its maintenance is dependent upon a high degree of co-operation. The
imminence of an economic breakdown which is becoming generally admitted,
raises, therefore, the question, Could the modern technology be rebuilt
after the breakdown?

Now, it is my contention that the economic and psychological conditions
necessary to reconstruct it will be absent. Once there is a breakdown
the spell that blinds the modern world will be broken and all the
anarchistic tendencies of the modern man will be liberated. Every
popular demand to-day is for something which is incompatible with the
industrial order. That this incompatibility is not recognized is due to
the fact that few people trouble to carry ideas to their logical
conclusions and imagine they can eat their cake and have it at the same
time. The realization of these demands will, so far as the Industrial
system is concerned, be like putting new wine into old bottles, and it
will burst the bottles. The Industrial system demands for its
maintenance the servitude of the workers, while the workers demand
liberty. The life and soul of the system is the race for profits; the
workers demand production shall be for use and not for profit. Its
finance and technology involve a highly centralized control; the workers
demand a distributive initiative. This demand for something which is
incompatible with the industrial ideal is not only confined to the
consciously organized political workers; it is made by individuals in
their private capacity in every rank of society. Industrialism, built
upon the division of labour, denies men pleasure in their work. The
consequence is that men seek happiness in other ways, in the pursuit of
pleasure in their leisure, in the excitement of gambling. Both of these
things tend to undermine the old hard Puritanical morale which built up
and maintained the system. The gambling spirit in trade has, through
profiteering, dislocated the economic system, and led men to trust to
chance rather than hard work for success in life. The craving for
pleasure has become such that only the external pressure of
circumstances can keep men at work. The reaction against speeding up has
come. Nobody nowadays wants to do any work. The old incentives are gone.
Interest has gone out of work, and there is no prospect of the workmen
setting up in business on his own account, which up to a generation ago
preserved a certain morale in industry. Experience in large
organizations has taught men that success and promotion do not come to
the conscientious or capable worker, but to the toady and bluffer. All
this is demoralizing, and provides no basis for the future
reconstruction of industry on a mechanical basis. Now that the workers
are organized, the demand of the rank and file is not to control
industry. They have too strong a sense of human values to desire that
but to get through the day with the least possible effort. The reason
for this is that what the workers in their hearts really desire is
control of their own lives in the same way that the hand-loom weavers
had control; and it is because mass production everywhere stands between
them and such control that subconsciously they everywhere seek the
destruction of the industrial system.

In these circumstances, if industry is to be rebuilt after the economic
breakdown, it will have to be rebuilt upon a different foundation, and
its central aim must be to give back to men pleasure in their work. A
rebuilt Industrialism cannot do this, because its central principle is
that of the division of labour. It is all very well for would-be
industrial reformers to talk about stimulating the creative impulse of
industry, but the system of the division of labour precludes this
possibility. I confess to a complete inability to understand reformers
who talk about "stimulating the impulses of youth for creative
existence" and don't challenge the system of the division of labour. I
doubt very much whether they mean anything. Nay, I do not doubt it; I am
sure of it. We know that the system of the division of labour was the
great factor in the destruction of the creative impulse, and we may be
sure that the impulse will not reappear until the system is destroyed.
It came into existence for the purposes of exploitation, and it will go
with it. If men are ever to regain control over their environment, the
system of the division of labour will need to be broken, since so long
as it remains the mass of workers will be at the mercy of the power that
directs the system.

But, it will be asked, is machinery to disappear? It will need to in so
far as its effect has been to enslave man. Generally speaking, this
would mean that small machines would be permitted, while large ones
would be forbidden on the principle that a large machine tends to
enslave man, because he must sacrifice himself mentally and morally to
keep it in commission, whereas a small one has not this effect, because
it can be turned on and off at will. Exceptions would have to be made to
this rule, as in the case of pumping and lifting machinery where no
question of keeping it in commission necessarily enters. The difficulty
of deciding where a machine was and was not harmful would not be
difficult to determine once the general principle were admitted that
machinery needs to be subordinated to man.

# Parliamentarianism and the Nineteenth Century

By the end of the eighteenth century the regime established by the
Reformation in England began to show signs of breaking down. The pursuit
of wealth which had been the vitalizing principle of the period was
bringing in its train all manner of economic and political
complications. It had resulted in the concentration of wealth in the
hands of the few. Class divisions and class hatred were increasing.
Money made in trade was employed in land speculation. Rents were raised
and wages reduced. After the Napoleonic wars there came economic
stagnation and widespread unemployment. Government had fallen into the
hands of an oligarchy who wielded all political power. Spiritually,
society was dead. Religion had reached its lowest ebb. Architecture had
become a lifeless formula. The crafts, from being media of aesthetic
expression, had degenerated into affairs of trade and commerce. Some
slight tradition of art lingered in painting, which henceforth
monopolized the name of art. Political science as a theory of the social
organism had entirely disappeared, and its place had been taken by a new
political economy which revived the laws of the jungle. Nothing now
remained of the old mediaeval order but its human tradition which
survived among the poor. Mankind was left

>  Wandering between two worlds, one dead,
>
> The other powerless to be born.

The nineteenth century is the story of the wandering.

Though the world was dead, it was not without hope. The old order was
gone. Most people thought it had gone for ever, for out of its ashes new
hopes had arisen. The French Revolution and the Industrial Revolution
combined to give the age a vision. It was not the vision of a new social
order, but of idealized anarchy, for the impulse of the century was
destructive rather than constructive. Social order is impossible apart
from privileges involving reciprocal rights and duties. But privileges
in the post-Reformation period had come into disrepute, partly because
they were monopolized by the few instead of being shared by the many, as
was the case in the Middle Ages, but mainly because they were so grossly
abused by those who claimed rights but repudiated responsibilities.
Hence it was that as privileges were associated with tyranny, liberty,
in the minds of Radicals, became associated with the abolition of
privileges, with the negation of social order, with anarchy. The French
Revolution had given men the hope that the governing class might be
overthrown. But its influence was ephemeral and had evaporated by the
middle of the century. It is less to the influence of the French
Revolution than to that of the Industrial Revolution that we must look
for an interpretation of the nineteenth century, for it was the central
driving force which completely disrupted what remained of the old social
order, reducing it to atomic units which lacked the principle of
cohesion except for the purposes of economic and military defence. That
so little resistance was offered to the socially disintegrating
influence of machinery was due to the fact that the automaton came to
exercise an influence over the minds of men akin to that of magic. It
hypnotized them into the belief that there was some virtue in change for
the sake of change, that what was new was in some mysterious way
superior to the old and that in some way unknown to themselves the
machine would, if given free play, solve all social problems. For so
many generations had the descendants of the men who stole the Church
lands drilled into the minds of the people the idea that the Middle Ages
was a period of black tyranny, ignorance, superstition and poverty, that
a prejudice had been created which was fatal to all clear thinking on
social questions and credence was given to the idea, enunciated by Adam
Smith, that poverty was due to lack of productive power instead of to
gross social and economic injustice, as was actually the case. It was
thus that during the nineteenth century faith in the benevolence of
machinery became the faith of the people. Its sufficiency was exalted
into a dogma above and beyond discussion. A man might question God but
not the machine---to do so was heresy in the nineteenth century. Hence
the key to the century is not to be found in ideas, for the great men of
the century left no permanent impression on their age, but in this
hypnotic belief in progress which carried all before it. As the machine
created problem after problem, barrier after barrier was swept away, and
as each one was swept away civilization found itself somewhere where it
never expected to be.

The change in the material and economic base of society was accompanied
by the growth of an intellectual fluidity which is really not so much a
definite conviction or emotion as a rotting or a deliquescence, a
melting and confounding of the outlines of beliefs and desires, a going
to slush of all values, a thawing and liquefaction of all that was hard
and permanent in the world\... The whole of modernism is an attempt to
obliterate distinctions---to discover similarity and unity everywhere.
All men are equal, men are the same as women, good is the same as evil,
freewill does not exist, catastrophe has no place in the universe, and
everything is gradually evolved.\"\[\^1\] The first step in this
movement towards the obliteration of varieties was taken by Adam Smith
in the *Wealth of Nations*; the last was taken by Mr. Bernard Shaw in
the *Quintessence of Ibsenism*. It was Mr. Shaw's strange ambition to
emancipate mankind by emptying life of its remaining contents, but the
more Mr. Shaw seeks to change things the more he reveals himself a child
of the established material fact, who is content to take the material
achievement for granted as a thing of permanence and stability. He had
lived all his life in a world of illusions, vainly imagining he was at
work laying the foundations of a new social order, whereas in reality he
was doing nothing more or less than assisting to remove the last barrier
that stood between industrial civilization and its final catastrophe.
For catastrophe became inevitable from the day it became the fashion for
men to deny its possibility; for when the fear of catastrophe was
removed no power remained capable of restraining the forces of social
destruction. These crazy heretical philosophers were followed in the
nineteenth century because they were the only people who could set
things in motion. After the Napoleonic wars economic stagnation had
overtaken England as a consequence of the concentration of wealth in the
hands of a few. In the normal course of affairs this undue concentration
would have led to a revolution in England as it did in France, but this
was averted by following the advice of these false prophets who taught
the governing class the art of postponing the crisis by extending the
area of exploitation. This was the secret of the success of the Free
Trade policy; of the economic relief which uncontrolled machinery
brought. By producing large quantities of goods cheaply, which enabled
our manufacturers to exploit distant markets, by the development of
railway building which offered new opportunities for investment and
caused a great shifting of the centres of population from villages to
small towns and from small towns to big ones, activity was stimulated in
every direction. This temporarily decentralized wealth and brought about
a distributed initiative. The prosperity thus artificially created led
people to suppose that the principles of the new political economy were
eternally true instead of being a mere theoretical justification of
measures of economic expediency, useful at a particular juncture but
with no finality about them. The supposed central truth of the new
economics having been established in this way, sophists found no
difficulty in persuading the world that all other ideas and traditions
which clashed with the demands of "progress" were of themselves dated.
Such ideas, they affirmed, might be true at one stage of social
evolution but not at another. All truth, they maintained, was relative;
absolute truth did not exist.

\[\^1\] Letter to the New Age, by E. Cowley, November 13, 1913.

Meanwhile people who had preserved their mental balance found themselves
at a disadvantage. To them the fallacies of the new gospel were
manifest. They found it easy to expose them, but impossible to base any
practical activity upon the truth as they understood it. The reason for
this was to be found in the fact that since the decline of religion and
art the links between them and the popular mind had been broken. They
were no longer understood. Hence it came about that throughout the
nineteenth century efforts were made by means of experiments and
historical research to find lost roads and to recover lost truths.
Efforts were made to revive religion, art and social science. This is
the secret of the great intellectual and scholastic activity of the
nineteenth century. Its aim was to enable men to regain that grip on
reality which they had lost. To talk about the nineteenth century as
being an age of enlightenment is nonsense. It was perhaps the darkest
period in history, when the great traditions were dead; when great men
groped for the light and ordinary men were saved from despair by the
hypnotism of the machine.

But the world heeded such workers little. The problems of the immediate
present pressed so heavily upon the majority that they were in no mood
to listen to any gospel that could not promise immediate results. They
were impatient with men who took longer views. Hence it was all through
the nineteenth century the blind led the blind. Politics concerned
themselves with appearances; realities lived underground. Two men only
who were prominent in political life were possessed of a strong sense of
reality---Cobbett and Disraeli. The former made a desperate effort to
pump realities into politics from below; the latter having failed to
pump realities into them from above, came to accept the situation and
exploit it.

Cobbett towers above all his contemporaries as a man in touch with
realities. He associated himself with all the Radicals of his age in
their demand for the reform of Parliament. Though he differed with them
fundamentally as to the nature of the problems of society, he saw as
clearly as they did the need of Parliamentary reform. The ideal of
government as it existed in the Middle Ages was to give protection to
the workers. It was for this purpose that charters were given to the
Guilds and the Feudal Lord held his position. But since the revival of
Roman Law, government had become increasingly associated with
exploitation, and after the Reformation it existed for little else. The
plutocrats who controlled it not only refused to give the people
economic protection, but forbade them to organize to protect themselves.
In these circumstances the necessary first step towards reform was to
change the Government, but as Parliament was elected upon a franchise
which was limited and corrupt, and the people were deprived of any place
in the social scheme, this involved electoral reform, upon which, after
the Napoleonic wars came to an end, the Radicals concentrated their
attention.

Though for the attainment of electoral reform Cobbett co-operated with
the Radicals, he took a different view to them on almost everything, and
looking at the situation from the point of view of to-day it is possible
to say that Cobbett was in the main right. He exhibited a wider grip of
the social problem than perhaps any one in the nineteenth century, not
to forget Ruskin. Though he recognized that the governing class was
corrupt, he nevertheless recognized that the Tory stood for many things
that were true. He did not fall into that most hopeless of modern errors
of assuming that because men did not live up to their professions
therefore their professed faith was at fault, or that because a creed
contained a certain admixture of error it might not contain a large
element of truth. In the main Cobbett was content to take the old
political philosophies and traditions for granted, and directed his
attacks at the governing class for misusing them. His fine traditional
and historic sense was here his salvation. Cobbett's *History of the
Reformation* may not be a work of scholarship, but it is a work of
genius. In it he shows an insight into the Reformation and its political
and economic consequence which throws a flood of light on history and
the economic problem. It is superior to the economic histories of more
recent times to the extent that it recognizes the existence of other
things than economics.

While Cobbett rose superior to the current historical prejudices he saw
more clearly than any other man the trend of his age. Industrialism and
Adam Smith he hated, and indeed it was the combination of the two that
made Industrialism such a scourge. But in his protests against factory
life he appears to have stood alone among prominent reformers. The
Radicals who came after him accepted Industrialism as an established
fact, and Radicalism lost its hold on the rural population. There can
but be one reason for this---that the peasantry felt that the Radicals
in accepting Industrialism and Adam Smith had deserted their cause and
that, bad as the Tories were, the Liberals stood for something far
worse. They felt instinctively that the Radicals' gospel of salvation
was calculated to make things worse for them by rendering the
circumstances of their life even more unstable; and they were right.

Not only did Radicalism by the support it gave to the Manchester School
lose the peasantry, but it divided the forces of reform in the towns. It
separated Middle-Class from Working-Class reformers. The Reform Bill of
1832 incorporated the new industrial towns and abolished the rotten
boroughs, but it did not secure payment of members. Disappointment with
the Reform Bill led to the Chartist agitation, which was a combination
of the old Radical political party and the new Socialist and Trade Union
Movements. It revived the Radical programme of 1816. The agitation,
after being carried on for eleven years, reached a climax when the
Revolution of 1848 in France aroused them to their last great effort.
But it all came to nothing. After 1848 the Trade Unionists retired from
political agitation and directed their attention exclusively to the work
of building up their own internal organizations---a policy which they
continued until in our day the Socialist agitation brought them once
more into the political field. But in the meantime they succeeded in so
consolidating their strength that with their re-emergence they have
become a force to be reckoned with both in the political and industrial
world. There is no reason to doubt, therefore, that their decision in
1848 to retire from political agitation was the one that wisdom
dictated.

But there was another cause for the decline of working-class political
agitation after 1848---the development of railway building. It was this
perhaps more than anything else that broke the power of the Chartist
agitation by providing an abundance of employment, which, except for
short periods of trade depression, lasted until the end of the century,
and which reconciled the workers to the fact of Industrialism, if not
whole-heartedly, at least to the extent of persuading them that
resistance to it was hopeless. It is well to remember that the workers
at any time have never really believed in it. In its early days they
definitely disbelieved in it and did all in their power to resist its
encroachments, going so far in the days of the Luddite riots as to break
up machinery. If they came finally to acquiesce if not to believe in
Industrialism, it is because the old order had so completely disappeared
that they had no longer anything with which to compare it. But still
they are restless under it and must increasingly become so until it is
finally destroyed; for a force so mechanical runs contrary to every
healthy normal human instinct, and no peace or social and political
stability is possible so long as it remains.

The immediate political effect of the acquiescence of the working class
in industrialism was their acceptance of the political leadership of the
new capitalists into whose hands political power had passed. They were
wealthy, and were able successfully to dispute political power with the
landed plutocracy (whom it is customary to call the old aristocracy), of
whose rule the people had had such a bitter experience. The new
capitalists had restored prosperity. Perhaps after all there was
something to be said for them. There are two sides to every question;
the working class might not be the entire receptacles of political
wisdom. In some such way as this, I imagine, a working man would reason.
Though he could not see eye to eye with the capitalists, he nevertheless
was up against the fact that trade boomed and the condition of the
working class was improving. In such circumstances perhaps the best
policy was to support the capitalists in their general policy, while by
means of better working-class organization to secure for the workers a
greater share of the wealth produced. It was a perfectly intelligible
position, and it is not sur prising that it gained the day.

But there was another reason for the support they gave---the success of
the Free Trade policy as exemplified by the repeal of the Corn Laws.
England had become to some extent dependent on the supply of foreign
corn. During the Napoleonic wars this supply was so hampered that wheat
rose to famine prices, and with this rise there came an increase in
rents and the price of land. But after peace was made prices began to
fall, and the landlords demanded duties on corn to keep up the price of
wheat. The manufacturers, on the other hand, wanted cheap food for their
workpeople in order to be able to pay them low wages. As a compromise,
the Corn Laws of 1814 and 1828 were enacted. They provided a sliding
scale of duties which rose as prices fell, and fell as prices rose. But
the compromise did not for long remain satisfactory to the
manufacturers. While the Chartists were agitating for political reform
an Anti-Corn-Law League was started to procure the abolition of import
duties on grain. The agitation which they carried on all over the
country secured the support of the workers, who were persuaded that the
repeal of the Corn Laws would increase the value of their wages. As a
consequence of the agitation, the failure of the potato crop in Ireland
and a bad harvest in England, Sir Robert Peel in 1846 carried a measure
for the gradual abolition of the corn duties. The repeal of the duties
did not immediately affect the price of corn, but it enormously
increased the supply. The price of corn fell later, when the English
consumer got the benefit of the decreasing prices which followed the
exploitation of virgin lands in America and the colonies. The repeal of
the Corn Laws was followed by the abolition of duties on hundreds of
articles and the reduction of duties on others; direct taxation in the
form of income tax being resorted to in order to replace the loss of
revenue.

Free Trade during the nineteenth century became such a fundamental
principle of English financial policy, and it coincided so entirely with
the period of industrial expansion and prosperity, that it has come to
be believed in by numberless people as something sacrosanct---the magic
formula of Free being sufficient to invest it for such people with a
halo of sanctity which renders them entirely oblivious to its practical
consequences. But are there any real grounds for such a faith? As a
measure of temporary economic expediency, the repeal of the Corn Laws
may be justified, though as far as I can see there are no grounds for
supposing that the prosperity of the years which followed the repeal was
caused by it. It coincided with the period of railway building, and
there are far stronger reasons for supposing that money began to
circulate freely because of the employment that railway building gave
than because of the Free Trade policy. It would have been well for
England if the repeal of the Corn Laws had only been justified as a
measure of expediency, but unfortunately, as it was exalted into a
principle that was sacrosanct, it was followed at a later date by most
serious consequences. Firstly, it allowed the importation of sweated
goods to bring down the wages of labour in certain trades; then it
operated to destroy agriculture and depopulated rural areas by bringing
the English wheat into competition with the wheat grown on the virgin
lands of America and the colonies; while, lastly, it has built up a
vested interest inimical to the interests of the country. It is well
that we should not lose sight of the fact that Free Trade confers
privileges just as much as Protection; the difference being that whereas
manufacturers and farmers profit by Protection, merchants and shippers
profit by Free Trade. Both give rise to political corruption, but
whereas in one case it is open corruption, in the other it is concealed.

That both Free Trade and Protection should give such unsatisfactory
results is due to the fact that the issue between them is a false issue
that arises in the absence of Guilds to control production and prices.
No stable economic system would begin with economic expediency, whether
in the interests of manufacturers or merchants, but with the protection
of the standard of life of the worker. In the absence of Guilds it is
better for a community to suffer from the corruption incidental to
Protection than from the corruption incidental to Free Trade, for its
social and economic effects are less harmful, not only because the
corruption which accompanies Protection is more open, and can therefore
be more easily attacked, but because it must remain impossible for a
community to attain economic stability that allows the workers in any
industry to be placed at the mercy of the fluctuations of prices in
distant markets and to be undercut by the importation of sweated goods
from other countries as happened under Free Trade. The only remedy
finally is to be found in a restoration of the Guilds, in connection
with which Protection would take its place as the natural corollary of a
system of fixed prices controlling the currency.

But there are further evils. Free Trade having placed power in the hands
of merchants and financiers, establishes the trader's point of view in
politics. With it has come the pernicious habit of viewing social and
industrial activities primarily from the point of view of the profit
accruing from them rather than from that of the well-being of the
community as a whole, and this, as we have had experience during the
war, may on occasion bring disaster. In peace-times this point of view
was operative in the work of social disintegration. It has led to the
decrease of the production of necessary and desirable things and
diverted labour to the production of useless and undesirable things, or,
in other words, it has exalted secondary above primary production. Only
a Government controlled by trading interests could be blind to the folly
of allowing things to drift in this way, or if not blind, at any rate
powerless to devise means of changing the current. The Nemesis that is
overtaking us is the natural and inevitable consequence of allowing the
direction of the politics and industry of the country to be determined
solely by considerations of the markets. Societies that are stable act
otherwise. The Mediaevalists, like Aristotle, recognized the danger
inherent in allowing the trading class to exercise an undue
preponderance of influence in national policy.

The reason why in the nineteenth century the trading interest was able
to carry all before it was ultimately due to the complete disappearance
of religion and art and the communal ideal of society, though
immediately it was due to intellectual confusion, stupidity, and the
hypnotic influence of machinery which prevented men from giving serious
consideration to any line of reasoning that came into collision with its
uncontrolled use. This was the reason why Ruskin was thrown aside. He
laid the basis of a tradition of thought that might have borne fruit in
these days if men could only have held fast to that which was good when
appearances were against them. But faith in reality was weak in the
nineteenth century; men trusted entirely in appearances, and so it came
about that when the conclusions of the Manchester School were cast aside
they still clung to its utilitarian philosophy and habit of mind.
Disraeli in the days of his youth made an effort to bring the age back
to realities. *Sybil* was a valiant attempt to persuade the governing
class to face the facts of the situation. He saw the trouble arising
from intellectual confusion, class stupidity, the absurdity and un
reality of the Party System, and from the stiff-necked attitude of
capital towards labour. *Sybil* having missed fire, he became
disheartened, and by the time he came to write *Lothair* he had
abandoned his generous dreams and taken to ironical badinage.
*Popanilla* is a magnificent burlesque on the utilitarian philosophy. It
demonstrates clearly that he was alive to the contradictions and
absurdities in which the Radicals were involved. But while he saw
clearly what was wrong, he had no clear vision as to what was right.
This was perhaps the secret of his political career, and has led to much
misunderstanding and misrepresentation. He came to fight on the
Conservative side, not because he believed in the Conservatives, but
because he disbelieved in the Radicals; not because his sympathies were
undemocratic, but because he disbelieved in the democratic leaders, whom
he had sufficient insight to see did not represent the people. In his
efforts to defeat a party of unconscious humbugs he became a conscious
humbug himself, for he came cynically to accept plutocracy though
inwardly despising it, while Gladstone idealized its achievements
because he never understood their inwardness. Still, in spite of their
difference, Disraeli and Gladstone really co-operated for the same end,
to retain power for the plutocracy, and under their combined leadership
politics drifted farther and farther away from realities. The smugness
and complacency of the later Victorian age was only shaken by the
emergence of the Irish problem into the forefront of political issues.
Yet all the while great changes were being prepared underground. But
Parliament was cognizant of none of them. It floated about on the
surface of things, skilfully evading every real issue until at length,
in 1906, it was awakened from its dreams of false security by the
arrival of the Labour Party at the House of Commons, when the governing
class first became seriously aware of the democratic upheaval that was
taking place. The popular disappointment with the performances of the
Labour Party led to a reaction against Parliamentarianism which
coincided with the great strikes of 1911, from which time the Industrial
Movement may be dated.

# On Limited Liability Companies

In the middle of the nineteenth century a series of Acts of Parliament
were passed conferring upon joint-stock companies the privilege of
limited liability. As the conduct of industry has been completely
revolutionized and the structure of society transformed through the
promotion of limited companies which followed the passing of these Acts,
they are to be reckoned among the most important events of the century,
and it is necessary for an understanding of the problems of to-day that
their significance be understood. Their reaction upon the social and
industrial life of the community has been to place society at the mercy
of an impersonal and intangible tyranny which by paralysing all healthy
and normal activities reacts to introduce a kind of fatalism into
economic, social and political developments by placing every one at the
mercy of an elusive financial machine. It is to be observed that this
new economic development which carried the principle of exploitation to
its logical conclusion by divorcing possession from the control of
industry was, like all previous economic developments, preceded by acts
of legislation.

Something approximating to limited liability existed in the reign of
Elizabeth. When in the year 1600 she acceded to the request of the East
India merchants for a Charter of Incorporation, when they had urged that
the trade with the Indies was too remote to be capable of proper
management without a "joint and united stock," she created *ipso facto*
a limited liability company. For as the Common Law then only recognized
individuals and corporations as legal entities, the effect of the grant
of a charter to a trading company was to grant a species of limited
liability such as exists in the case of a company limited by shares that
are fully paid up, under the Acts now in force; though as the trade of
the East India Company was so profitable, no question of the liability
for debts ever arose. Hitherto merchants engaged in foreign trade had
been organized under "regulated" companies like the Russia, the Turkey,
and the Eastland Companies. They were really Merchant Guilds whose
members enjoyed a monopoly of their specific trade in a given district,
but were originally in no sense financially associated or liable for one
another's engagements. The Charter of the East India Company in
acknowledging joint-stock introduced a new principle of trade
organization which was not by any means popular with merchants
generally. The merchants of the "regulated" companies sneered at the
incorporated joint-stock East India Company because the latter were
unable to "breed-up" merchants, seeing that "any one who is a master of
money may purchase a share of their trade and joint-stock."

On account of its unpopularity the joint-stock principle made little
headway. As late as the end of the seventeenth century there were only
three joint-stock companies in existence---the East India, the Royal
African, and the Hudson Bay Companies. In the early eighteenth century
private joint-stock companies began to be formed whose legal position
was uncertain, for monopolies for foreign trade had been abolished in
the latter part of the reign of James I. One of these, the South Sea
Company, which was organized to exploit the unknown wealth of South
America, managed by bribes to ministers and by promising to reduce the
national debt to secure in 1720 a Charter of Incorporation. It was in
vain that Walpole warned the Ministry and the country against this dream
of wealth. Both went mad. A wave of reckless financial speculation
overwhelmed the country. Bubble company was followed by bubble company
until the inevitable crash came, bringing a general ruin in its train.
It was followed by the Bubble Act, which forbade the formation of
companies without the sanction of Crown or Parliament as "a mischievous
delusion calculated to ensnare the unwary public." The Act appears to
have remained largely a dead letter, probably because after the South
Sea Bubble, in which many companies came to grief in addition to the one
bearing its name, political and mercantile opinion was so averse to the
formation of joint-stock companies that few attempts at company
promotion were made, and so things remained until the early part of the
nineteenth century, when the Industrial Revolution, by opening out new
fields of industry with which it was impossible for individual
capitalists to cope, gradually introduced a change in public opinion. In
1825 an Act was passed repealing the Bubble Act, and encouragement was
given to the formation of companies. By this statute the Crown was
empowered to grant Charters of Incorporation, and at the same time to
declare that the persons incorporated should be individually liable for
the debts of the body corporated. Public opinion in those days did not
think it desirable that the members of joint-stock companies should be
allowed to limit their liability to a specified amount. In 1834 an Act
was passed giving such companies the privilege of bringing and defending
actions and other legal proceedings in the name of an officer of a
company.

Hitherto, in order for a joint-stock company to be incorporated, it was
necessary for it to obtain a charter from the Crown or a special Act of
Parliament, but in 1844 a new departure was made enabling companies,
with certain exceptions, to obtain a Certificate of Incorporation from
the Registrar without having recourse to Crown or Parliament, but still
with unlimited liability. In 1855 the principle of limited liability
triumphed when power was given to companies to obtain a Certificate of
Incorporation with limited liability. The change of opinion which made
this possible was due to the ruin which unlimited liability had brought
upon innocent men. At the period of the collapse of the railway boom in
1845 many such men liable for calls had to fly the country and to live
abroad for many years upon what remnants of their property they could
manage to save from the wreck. But it was not until a bank failure in
Glasgow, when the holder of a small share was made liable for a thousand
times its amount, that public opinion was roused. The Act of 1855 which
first acknowledged the principle of limited liability was repealed and
replaced by one in 1856, which served in many respects as a model for
the Act of 1862 which forms the basis of the existing code of
Joint-Stock Company Law.

Before the passing of these Acts, joint-stock companies were few and far
between, but once the principle of limited liability was admitted in law
they rapidly grew in numbers. They have invaded every branch of industry
with the exception of agriculture, though as these pages are being
written I read of the coming of a movement for applying limited
liability company methods to agriculture and an announcement that a
company is to be formed to exploit an estate of 19,000 acres in
Lincolnshire, the purchase money for which amounts to over £2,000,000.
The great boom when private concerns were turned into limited companies
and new companies promoted came in the nineties, when, in the eight
years from 1892 to 1899, 30,061 new companies were registered in the
United Kingdom and 10,578 were wound up. In April, 1899, there were
27,969 registered joint-stock companies in the United Kingdom with a
share capital, having an aggregate paid-up capital of£ 1,512,098,098. In
April, 1914, the latest return before the war broke upon us, the number
of companies had increased to 64,692 with a capital of £2,531,947,661.
The latest return, that of 1916, gives the number of companies
registered as 66,094 with a capital of £2,719,989,129.These figures are
all the more striking when it is remembered that they do not include
most of our great railway, gas, water, canal and other similar companies
which have private Acts of Parliament of their own.

To such an extent have limited liability companies got a grip of modern
business that it is impossible to separate the two. But that they are
not an unmixed blessing, from whatever point of view examined, no one
will be found to deny. There is no doubt whatsoever that they have been
the main factor in the creation of that flood of commercial dishonesty
and legalized fraud which in these days carries all before it. Companies
have been formed simply in order to put money into the pockets of
promoters, to get rid of declining businesses so that the existing
owners may withdraw their capital to invest in something else while
leaving the shareholders with nothing but the debts to pay. In other
cases companies have been formed in order to create a dummy behind which
some sinister figure might move. Such abuses are admitted. But to the
business man of to-day these disadvantages are more than counterbalanced
by the advantages they are supposed to bring, in that they have rendered
possible an enormous number of undertakings which from the amount of
capital required could not have been carried out by an individual
capitalist or group of capitalists. This has been said so often that
people are inclined to accept the statement without further examination.
Yet it very much needs examination, for the real question is not whether
it has rendered possible undertakings which otherwise could not have
been promoted, but whether it was in the public interest that such
undertakings should be entered upon at all; for remember, such
enterprises as those of railways, water, gas, etc., rest on private Acts
of Parliament and are not to be confused with the general issue of
limited liability.

Now it will clear the issue if we begin with the opinion of Adam Smith,
who in the *Wealth of Nations* probably expressed the current view on
the subject of joint-stock companies when he said that the only trades a
joint-stock company not having a monopoly can carry on successfully are
those in which all the operations are capable of being reduced to
routine or of such a uniformity of method as admits of little or no
variation. Only four trades, in his opinion, answer the test of
suitability which he thus laid down, namely, those of banking, of fire
and marine insurance, of making and maintaining canals, and of water
supply. Railways, tramways, gas and electric supply he would doubtless
have added as belonging to the same category if such things had existed
in his time. Manufacturing by a joint-stock company, he considers, would
not only be unsuccessful as a business, but would be injurious to the
public welfare.

Now the question comes, Was Adam Smith right? Has modern experience
controverted him or are appearances only against him? I do not hesitate
to say that he was absolutely right when he said that manufacturing by
joint-stock companies would be injurious to the public interest, but
experience has proved him to be wrong when he said they would be
unsuccessful. If success for them depended upon efficiency as producers,
they would certainly fail. But success for limited liability companies
does not depend upon any such efficiency but upon an ability to corner
the market in some way. The usual ways are either to use their great
capital for keeping others out by advertising; by manipulating prices in
such a way that a market is secured for certain things at very enhanced
prices while underselling small men in others, thus preventing any one
from competing with them who is not on a similar scale of business; or
by securing a tied market by judiciously distributing shares among those
who can be of service to the company in recommending business. Each of
these methods is corrupting. I will not enlarge on the evils attendant
upon advertising and manipulated prices,since both of these illegitimate
methods of trade were pursued by private firms before limited companies
held the field, but will dwell upon the third of these methods, because
it is the one thing, apart from its ease in getting hold of capital,
that gives the limited company an illegitimate advantage over the
private firm, while it is the most corrupting of its corrupting
influences.

By distributing shares among those who can be of service to it, the
limited company corrupts the public by obtaining business in an illicit
way while at the same time it closes the market to new men. Henceforward
the competent man who would set up in business is unable to do so
because the market is rigged against him. It is no longer possible for a
man, however competent he may be, to come to any position in industry
apart from the favour of those already established, except he be
possessed of large capital or great influence, as the case might be,
such as would enable him to weather the storm and difficulties of
getting established. These circumstances immediately produced a change
in the psychology of industry. Hitherto, success had come to the man of
grit and competence. Such qualities were the ones that made for success
under the system of competition. But men soon found that so far from
such qualities being an asset to them under a system of limited
liability companies, they were a positive hindrance; for success came
not to men of an independent spirit, but to men whose temperament was
characterized by flexibility and subservience, or, in other words, the
qualities of master ship which told to advantage in the open market when
combined, it should be added, with some commercial instinct were no
longer in demand under a system of large organizations and limited
companies; the demand being entirely for men of secondary talents, not
for men of initiative, but for men of routine. Hence talent was
discouraged and mediocrity preferred. This tendency has gathered
strength ever since limited companies came to dominate the situation. It
has been well denned as "the principle of inverted selection." Its
application guaranteed company directors a temporary tranquillity, but
has so completely undermined the morale of industry as to leave them
entirely without reliable counsellors when industry is required to
adjust itself to a new situation, as the present crisis bears witness.

The reason for these changed circumstances is easy to understand. They
came about because the joint-stock principle in placing the final
authority in shareholders places it in the hands of amateurs. Amateurs,
however, are never allowed to see things as they really are, but only
what it is convenient for others to let them see. Hence there is a
tendency for reality and appearances to drift ever farther apart. A man
has not to work long inside of a large organization before he discovers
that doing good work and securing promotion are two entirely separate
and distinct propositions, and that so far from good work (except of the
routine kind) helping him, it may actually stand in his way by bringing
him into collision with others who have a vested interest in things
remaining as they are, and who therefore will do eve\^thing to defeat
the ends of the innovator. Promotion, on the contrary, goes with being a
"good fellow"; with toadying to men in position; with maintaining an
appearance of doing things but not with actually doing them, since that
is much more likely to lead to trouble; with managing things in such a
way as to secure the credit for things that are successful for oneself
and to shuffle off responsibility for failure on to the shoulders of
others. This is not difficult in large organizations, for it is
generally impossible for any except those inside to know exactly for
what work any particular individual is responsible. There are, of
course, exceptions to this rule, but then there are exceptional
circumstances, and an institution is to be judged by its norm and not by
its exceptions. No one can deny that in large organizations success goes
to the bounder, to the man who studies the game rather than the work.
Certain of these evils arise from the mere size of such organizations,
which by making every individual dependent on his immediate superior
tends to give priority to personal considerations. These evils would
probably develop, however wise the heads might be, but they are
increased a hundredfold by the fact that in all such organizations,
whether they be limited liability companies or Government departments,
control is from without and authority rests finally in the hands of
amateurs.

Certain consequences follow from such an abnormal condition of affairs.
Finance having set out to exploit the producer, finds itself nowadays in
turn exploited by sharks who prey upon the amateurs. These are the
clever men who take the world as they find it. Realizing the stupidity
of the men in control, they play upon their vanity and carefully lay
traps into which they may fall. In exploiting the exploiters they afford
a certain amount of amusement for the exploited, while they perform a
useful function in bringing not only the commercial but our legal system
into discredit, for it so happens that they are able to pursue their
vocation because they are masters of the law.

While on the one hand limited companies have given rise to all manner of
legalized fraud, on the other hand they have created widespread
disaffection among the workers. The mass of men nowadays do not want to
do any work, because they feel that not they but others are going to
profit by their labour. So long as competence was rewarded and honour
appreciated there was an incentive for men to work. If they became
efficient they might get on to their own feet, and the presence of a
number of men with such ambitions in industry gave a certain moral tone
to it that reacted upon others. But when, owing to the spread of limited
companies, all such hopes were definitely removed and the invention of
automatic machinery rendered work entirely monotonous, when technical
ability, however great, went unrecognized and un rewarded, and
proficiency in any department of industry incurred the jealousy of
"duds" in high places, demoralization set in. All the old incentives
were gone, and no one was left to set a standard. The subconscious
instincts of men whose ambitions were thwarted turned into purely
destructive channels. Already before the war things had taken this turn,
but the wave of patriotism to which the war gave rise led to hopes that
a new spirit was to enter industry. But when, through the rapacity of
profiteers, it became apparent that such hopes were doomed to
disappointment, destructive impulses returned with redoubled energy.
That is the secret of the labour unrest. The profiteers have killed the
goose that laid the golden eggs.

It was because limited companies sought from the first to secure their
position by cornering the market rather than by a regard for their own
internal efficiency, that they have for ever been seeking to establish
themselves on a larger and larger scale. Consideration of internal
efficiency would have urged upon them the advantages of small
organizations, which in the nature of things are more manageable, but
the policy to which they were committed of maintaining themselves by
securing monopolies of the market obliged them to seek to operate on an
increasingly larger scale in order that they could more successfully
hold their own against competing companies. But the larger the scale
they operate upon, the greater becomes their need of capital; and the
greater their need, the more they tended to fall under the control of
the banks which monopolized credit. Major C. H. Douglas has given to
this new development which has supplanted capitalism the name of
Creditism.Capitalism was essentially private and individual, and because
of its private and individual nature a natural boundary was placed to
the dimensions of an organization. But when in order to be successful
business had to be started on a big scale, the possibility of the
individual capitalist starting any new enterprise became dependent in
the vast majority of cases upon being able to get the backing of some
bank. Hence it has come about that while it is an easy matter for a
company already established to secure additional capital to extend its
business operations, it has become almost impossible for a new man to
start; for a new man is an unknown quantity and is not to be trusted
with extensive credit. It has been thus that the arrival of limited
companies has been followed by a centripetal movement in finance which
encourages the organization of larger and larger concerns, not because
of the needs of efficiency, but because of the exigencies of credit,
which in turn still further widens the discrepancy between appearances
and reality, between control and potential ability.

In Germany the attempt was made to counteract this centripetal tendency
of finance by the institution of credit banks, which it was hoped would
restore a distributed initiative by inducing a centrifugal tendency. It
was a proverbial saying in Germany that with the aid of his bank a man
builds the first floor of his house by mortgaging the ground floor; his
second by mortgaging the first; and puts on the roof by the aid of a
mortgage upon his second floor. This is no exaggeration, for the banks
were accustomed to advance money to the extent of 90%, to men who
desired to set up in business, on a purely speculative goodwill, and to
accept as security for the remaining 10%, a valuation of such things as
household furniture. But it all availed nothing. The widespread
distribution of credit increased the efficiency of the industrial
machine to such an extent that in fifteen years Germany quadrupled her
output, and this led to such an intensification of the pace of
competition and profits were so reduced that in the years before the war
the great mass of German industries were rapidly approaching bankruptcy.
The stress of such circumstances doubtless precipitated the war. I have
little doubt that England owed her comparative immunity from such trying
conditions to her comparative inefficiency.

The failure of limited liability companies as a system of industrial
control suggests a comparison with the Mediaeval Guild system; for the
difference between them is the difference between the Mediaeval and
modern worlds. Under the modern system finance plays the all-important
part. It comes first and every other consideration plays a quite
secondary and unimportant part. As the system develops, technical skill
is less and less appreciated, and what naturally follows from it sinks
into a lower and lower status. On this side limited companies are living
on capital. Their influence tends to undermine all such skill, and as
the final test of an organization from the point of view of the public
is not the profits it makes but what kind of goods it produces, the
limited liability system of control from without stands condemned as the
worst system under which industry has ever been organized. The Mediaeval
Guild system was the exact reverse of this. The technical man or
craftsman, who under the limited liability company system is reckoned a
man of no account, was in control and he arranged things very
differently. Instead of organizing industry for the purpose of
extracting profits, he organized it with the aim of producing good work.
With this aim in view finance was reduced to the bare minimum by the
simple device of fixing prices. In large building works a bookkeeper was
employed, but apart from this finance appears to have been entirely
absent in production. The financial man confined his attention entirely
to distribution, and distribution in those days was a very secondary
form of activity. It did not bulk in anything like the proportion it
does to-day. The change which has taken the control of industry out of
the hands of the technical man and allowed the financier to spread his
tentacles over it is due finally to the revival of Roman Law, which
broke down barrier after barrier that placed a boundary to financial
operations. It began by transforming the Feudal system, based upon the
principle of function, into landlordism. This enabled capitalism to get
a foothold in rural areas, to develop domestic industry and undermine
the position of the Guilds. But the two things that made the great
change were, first, the Industrial Revolution, which undermined the
position of the craftsman and gave great opportunities to the financier,
and second, the legalization of limited liability, which handed over
technical trades entirely to commercial exploitation by divorcing
ownership from control and technical ability.

# The War and the Aftermath

>  "Commercial intercourse between nations, it was supposed some fifty
> years ago, would inaugurate an era of peace; and there appear to be
> many among you who still cling to this belief. But never was belief
> more plainly contradicted by the facts. The competition for markets
> bids fair to be a more fruitful cause of war than was ever in the past
> the ambition of princes or the bigotry of priests. The peoples of
> Europe fling themselves, like hungry beasts of prey, on every yet
> unexploited quarter of the globe. Hitherto they have confined their
> acts of spoliation to those whom they regard as outside their own
> pale. But always, while they divide the spoil, they watch one another
> with a jealous eye; and sooner or later, when there is nothing left to
> divide, they will fall upon one another. That is the real meaning of
> your armaments; you must devour or be devoured. And it is precisely
> those trade relations, which it was thought would knit you in the
> bonds of peace, which, by making every one of you cut-throat rivals of
> the rest, have brought you within reasonable distance of a general war
> of extermination" (*Letters from John Chinaman*, by **G. Lowes
> Dickinson**).

 

In August, 1914, this prophecy, made some twenty years ago, was
fulfilled. The German army entered Belgium, and the long-predicted war
broke over Europe. Until the day of its arrival large numbers of people
in this country were sceptical as to the reality of the menace. They had
been warned too often to believe it. Certain definite actions certainly
pointed to the coming of war. But on the other hand certain general
considerations weighed heavily against it. The industrial system was a
highly complex affair. It could only be maintained by a high degree of
reciprocity between the nations. In consequence a European war between
nations who had adopted conscription would be a life-and-death struggle
which would probably end in the destruction of modern civilization---in
a catastrophe in which the victorious as well as the vanquished would be
involved. It was difficult to believe that Germany would be oblivious to
this fact. There might be Jingoes bent on war in Germany, but then there
were Jingoes in England, and it did not necessarily follow that they
would get their own way. What reason was there to suppose that
difficulties could not be arranged by compromise and moderate opinion
prevail?

In some such way as this the mass of moderately minded people reasoned
before the war. That they so entirely misjudged the situation is perhaps
finally to be accounted for by the fact that its true inwardness was
never written about until after the war had broken out. We were told
about the vast preparations that Germany was making for war; about the
growth of armaments in which other European nations followed suit. But
we were never told *why* Germany was making such preparations. She had
nothing to fear from France--*La revanche* was dead---nor had she
anything to fear from England. Why was she arming? This at the time was
an enigma to thinking people who were not carried off their feet by
chauvinism. The trade of Germany was advancing by leaps and bounds. To
all appearances her prosperity was increasing. Why then did she exhibit
this querulous spirit? No satisfactory answer was forthcoming. Perhaps
after all it was only bluff intended to further the ends of her
diplomacy. The hazards of a general European war were so incalculable
that it was to be supposed that even Germany would not lightly embark
upon such an enterprise.

And indeed it is true to say that Germany did not embark lightly on war.
That she did eventually declare war was due to the fact that her
position had become desperate, and there can be little doubt that a
consciousness that it was only a matter of time before such a situation
would arise was the motive that all along prompted her to arm. The
exhaustion of markets, foreseen by all who ever reflected on the trend
of industrialism, had come about at last, and Germany was finding
herself in difficulties. The growth of the pressure of competition had
indicated for some time that other industrialized nations were beginning
to feel the pinch. But they had greater reserves, and their position was
far from desperate. England, for example, had a great reserve of wealth
in raw materials and colonies which provided an outlet for surplus
population and a market for surplus goods. Moreover, there was India,
which provided not only a market for goods, but posts for civil
servants. But Germany was not so fortunately placed. She was poor in raw
materials and had no first-class colonies and no dependencies. So it
came about that Germany became accustomed to compare her own position
with the more favourable position of England, and to imagine that if
only she had colonies and dependencies her economic condition would be
different; the pressure of competition would be relieved and her people
would be in a position to pursue their aims unaccompanied by those
financial worries which since the opening of the present century had
been a constant source of anxiety. This feeling was shared by the whole
nation, from capitalists who were eager for concessions to the students
of the universities. "Any one," says Mr. de Maeztu, "who has lived in
German university circles during the last few years will be able to
confirm my statement, that the greatest enthusiasts of colonial
expansion in Germany were not the manufacturers, but the students. Their
admiration and envy of British power in India were not aroused by
commercial prospects, but by the possibility of posts for military and
civil bureaucrats. In the future colonial empire of Germany the student
dimly discerned billets and pensions for hundreds of thousands of German
university graduates."It was the vision of such prospects that induced
them to favour a policy of aggression.

The part played by bureaucracies in fomenting racial and international
troubles should not be overlooked. The desire of their bureaucracies for
expansion was the one bond of common interest between Germany and
Austria, offering us some clue as to why the Austrian declaration of war
on Serbia was so popular in Vienna. Writing of the Austrian bureaucracy
before the war, Mr. Wickham Steed says "the 'race struggle' in Austria,
of which so much has been written, is largely a struggle for
bureaucratic appointments. Germans and Czechs have striven for years to
increase on the one hand and defend on the other their patrimony of
official positions. The essence of the language struggle is that it is a
struggle for bureaucratic influence. Similarly, the demand for new
Universities or High Schools put forward by Czechs, Ruthenes, Slovenes
and Italians but resisted by the Germans, Poles and other nations, as
the case may be, are demands for the creation of new machines to turn
out potential officials whom the political influence of Parliamentary
parties may then be trusted to hoist into bureaucratic appointments. In
the Austrian Parliament the Government, which consists mainly of
officials, sometimes purchases the support of political leaders by
giving State appointments to their kindred or *protégés*, or by
promoting *protégés* already appointed. One hand washes the other, and
service is rendered for service. On occasion the votes of a whole party
can be bought by the appointment of one of its prominent members to a
permanent Under-Secretaryship in a Department of State. Once appointed,
he is able to facilitate the appointment of other officials of his own
race or party. Each position thus conquered forms part of the political
patrimony of the race and party by whom it has been secured, and is
stoutly defended against attack. Appointments are thus multiplied
exceedingly---to the cost of the taxpayer and the complication of public
business.\"

Of course this kind of thing has its limits. A point is reached when the
burden of officials becomes so great to the taxpayer and so inimical to
the commercial interest of a country that the desire for further
expansion on the part of a bureaucracy can only be satisfied by
extending their powers over the inhabitants of other countries, and it
must be understood that the desire for expansion is inherent in
bureaucracies, for expansion provides opportunities for promotion. In a
stationary bureaucracy promotion is slow---a matter of waiting for dead
men's shoes. "For other classes the national idea of a sovereign State
is a disinterested, sentimental, and romantic ideal. For the officials,
on the other hand, the State is not only an ideal but a source of
income. It has been said---by Mr. Norman Angell, I believe---that when
the Germans annexed Alsace-Lorraine the rich of Alsace-Lorraine went on
being rich, the poor continued to be poor, labourers were still
labourers, and that the war had been useless from an economic point of
view. And it is quite possible that war may be useless from the point of
view of labourers, workmen and masters. But the two thousand French
professors in both provinces were replaced by two thousand Germans; and
the same thing happened with the army officers, the judges, the
officials of the public health boards, and so on. From the point of view
of the bureaucratic interests the war was not merely useless, but
positively disastrous for French officialdom and beneficial to the
German. A change of flag may not substantially alter the economic regime
of a specified district; but what does undoubtedly change is the
bureaucratic personnel. The official follows the flag. The official is
therefore the permanent soldier of the flag."

Though bureaucracies have an immediate interest in wars of conquest,
they are yet not sufficiently powerful to make wars on their own
account. Before a war can be successfully launched the nation as a whole
must be brought into line. The terrible financial strain to which
Germany had been subjected in the two or three years preceding the war
had induced a frame of mind favourable to the war party, and it is
conceivable that the war was as much caused by the desire for relief
from such trying circumstances as by the warlike proclivities of the
German ruling class. Germany was committed to a policy of indefinite
industrial expansion, and signs were not wanting that expansion had
reached its limit, for the enormous competition in the production of
goods had reduced profits to such an extent that it became evident that
the German financial system, built upon an inverted pyramid of credit,
could not for long bear the strain of such adverse conditions. So long
as peace continued there was no hope of relief, for the ratio of
production due to never slackening energy, technique and scientific
development was outstripping the ratio of demand. "In the fifteen years
before the war Germany had quadrupled her output, and in consequence a
day came when all the world that would take German-made goods was choked
to the lips. Economic difficulties began to make themselves felt, and
then the Prussian doctrine of force spread with alarming rapidity. War
was decided upon for the purpose of relieving the pressure of
competition by forcing goods upon other markets."Hence the demand for
colonial expansion, the destruction of the towns and industries of
Belgium and Northern France and the wholesale destruction of shipping by
the submarine campaign. They had all one object in view---to relieve the
pressure of competition, to get more elbow-room for German industries.
The idea of relieving the pressure of competition by such commercial
sabotage was not a new one. It had been, as I have pointed out, employed
by the Romans, who destroyed Carthage and the vineyards and olive-groves
of Gaul in order to avoid a damaging com petition, but it was a crazy
one all the same, for it embarked Germany upon a policy from which there
was no turning back, and left her no option but to conquer the world or
be annihilated in case of failure. There was no third alternative, for
such action removed the possibility of a peace by compromise.

It was finally because every other nation in Western Europe and America
was moving into a similar cul-de-sac that the desperate remedy sought by
Germany was no remedy at all. The reason why all were beginning to find
themselves in difficulties was because each of them had embarked upon a
policy of indefinite economic expansion on a basis of economic
injustice. Each of them had denied economic justice to the workers and
Nemesis was overtaking them all. It is only necessary to reflect on the
general economic situation to realize this. Greed had blinded them all
to the simple economic fact that it is impossible in the long run to
increase production except on the assumption that consumption be
correspondingly increased. Such an increase of consumption, it is
apparent, could only be permanently secured on an assumption that the
workers were allowed to have a proportionate share of the increased
wealth which they assisted to produce. But the policy of capitalists all
over the world being to secure all the advantages of increased
production for themselves, had created great inequalities of wealth, and
so it came about that as the people only earned a bare subsistence an
increased productivity could only be disposed of finally in two ways: by
the increase of luxuries for the wealthy on the one hand---for the
increase of consumption had to come entirely from the rich---or by
disposing of surplus goods in foreign markets. But such a policy had
well-defined limits. No nation could afford to be the consumer of
machine-produced goods indefinitely, as in that case the suction would
drain its economic resources, and so one nation after another was drawn
into the whirlpool of industrial production, until a time came at last
when there were no new markets left to exploit. When that point was
reached, the fundamental falsity of the whole system revealed itself in
the economic paradox that drove Germany into war.

The declaration of war gave the German economic system a new lease of
life by the enormous demand it created for munitions, which were sold to
the Government at prices which enabled loans and other financial
obligations to be met. The money for the payment of these munitions was
raised by loans which it was the intention of the German Government to
liquidate by means of the huge indemnities which they hoped to get from
the Entente. As a measure of temporary economic expediency the war for
Germany doubtless served its immediate purpose of setting the financial
machine in motion again, but even if Germany had been successful it
could not have solved her economic problem when peace returned, because
a policy of indefinite industrial expansion, by producing goods in
greater quantities than the market could absorb, was bound before long
to land her in the same position in which she found herself in 1914. In
the event of her being victorious, the most optimistic forecast of her
future would place her in the same position as England finds herself in
to-day, which is anything but rosy.

The outbreak of war caught England unprepared, and seriously dislocated
the old economic order. Accustomed supplies vanished and exceptional
demands immediately sprang up. Into a market of producers competing with
each other for a still greater number of consumers, which had kept
prices comparatively stationary, though the tendency for prices to rise
had been continuous for the twenty previous years, there came an
enormous demand for war material of one kind and another, and for this
there was only one buyer---the Government, acting at first through the
War Office and later through it and the Ministry of Munitions and other
Government departments. In the first few months of the war a wave of
patriotism passed over the country which apparently was so genuine that
it led the Yorkshire woollen manufacturers to offer to supply the
Government with khaki at a fixed price, but this offer, which would
probably have been followed by other manufacturers, was refused by the
War Office, who preferred to continue the system of competitive
contracts. The result was disastrous, for it so happened that the needs
of the Government were soon to become so great that the large firms
found themselves in a position to hold up the State for ransom, and as
the patriotic offer of the Yorkshire manufacturers had been refused,
they did not scruple to take the fullest advantage of the situation. The
unemployed problem to which the war immediately gave rise did not last
for long, but was speedily followed by a great demand for labour which
in turn was followed by a rise in wages, and from then onwards prices
and wages engaged in a neck-and-neck race. Meanwhile, in one way or
another, the vast majority of people, either directly or indirectly,
were working in the public service, and all this enormous artificial
activity was kept in motion and stimulated from above by means of State
loans and the wholesale issue of paper money which depreciated the
currency to such an extent as still further to inflate the already
inflated prices. It was thus that during the war nearly the whole nation
came to be living upon borrowed money, and it still continues to do so.

Since the coming of peace the problem has been how to return to the
normal. At the close of other wars the Government have usually disbanded
the troops for which they had no further use, exploited the loyalty of
the soldiers and then turned them adrift to starve or to make shift as
best they could. In spite of public professions, there is no reason to
suppose that the Government would not have acted any differently this
time, if it had dared to do so. But the scale of the present war made it
dangerous for the Government to play the old confidence trick with
impunity. The fact that nearly every worker was during the war either
directly or indirectly in the public service and the fact that the
workers are strongly organized made such a policy unthinkable, and so
unemployed allowances are made and the unemployed draw pay until such
time as industry can pick itself up again. But a suspicion gains ground
that it is no easy matter to get the wheels of industry in motion again.
It appears that the problem of reorganizing for peace is going to be a
much more difficult matter than organization for war. Consider for a
moment what has been taking place. Speculative finance, the motive force
of industrialism, has for over four years orientated itself around war
production. With peace all this activity has come to an end. Can the old
motive and driving force of speculative finance become again operative
in the industries it has forsaken? It is questionable. It was an easy
matter to transfer the labour of the community from peace production to
war production because it was a movement that was in accord with the
centrifugal movement in finance. All that was necessary was for the
Government to borrow money, place orders for munitions right and left,
and the thing was accomplished. To reverse the process will not be such
a simple matter, because it involves a centrifugal movement in finance,
and this is contrary to the normal trend of things in these days, for
whereas the centripetal movement was easy because it could be
accomplished by a centralized initiative, a centrifugal movement demands
a distributed one, and while our society responds readily to the touch
of a centralized initiative, the organs necessary to the exercise of a
distributed initiative were in the interests of commercial exploitation
destroyed in the past.

It will make the position clearer to say that a distributed initiative
exists in any society just to the extent that a man can employ himself.
The peasant State enjoys a distributed initiative because, when every
man owns his own plot of land or shares in a communal holding, he can
set himself to work. This is the reason why peasant nations recuperate
so quickly after wars, even under modern conditions. When a war is over,
every man can go back to his own plot of land and work away just as he
did before the war broke out. But with highly complex industrial
communities, whose activities are based upon a highly complex system of
finance and which produce largely for distant markets, it is different,
because only a small percentage of the activities of such communities
have a basis in real human and fundamental needs. Production in such
communities comes to depend upon all manner of things, while most
members of such communities are dependent upon some one else for
employment---ultimately upon the possessors of capital who in such
communities monopolize all initiative. Hence it is that so long as
present conditions of wealth distribution obtain, if a revival of trade
is to take place it must proceed from the initiative of the small group
at the top who control the financial situation, and this places a
responsibility upon their shoulders heavier than they can bear. Hitherto
industrial initiative proceeded from below and was exploited by
financiers from above. But now the position is entirely reversed. The
short-sighted policy of financiers has gradually taken away initiative
from the man below. In seeking to concentrate all wealth in his own
hands, the financier has, unfortunately for his own peace of mind,
saddled himself with the responsibility of industrial initiative, and I
doubt not it will prove to be a burden too heavy for him to support. The
man below, so long as he enjoyed autonomy, could exercise initiative,
since the range of conditions he had to comprehend was limited and
familiar. But as a result of centralization the whole complex economic
phenomenon of our society would have to be comprehended intellectually
if an initiative such as would set the machinery in motion again is to
be exercised, and as the experience of every man is limited, this
becomes an impossible proposition. Industry can no longer be kept going
by the momentum it inherited from the past, and if trade is to revive it
must be galvanized into activity from above, and that is a different
story.

Though I am persuaded that there is finally no escape from the economic
cul-de-sac apart from a return to Mediaeval conditions, involving a
redistribution of wealth and initiative, it is yet possible that the
crisis may be postponed a few years by means of financial jugglery. A
glimmer of light comes from America, which, having become the financial
centre of the world, holds the key to the position. It is proposed that
the United States should raise an enormous loan for Europe to enable the
War Powers to restore their industry and credit. The principal means to
this end will be a loan and bond issue such as has never before been
seen, of a nature to secure the necessary funds for these Powers to buy
all they require and to extend their credit as long as may be
necessary---ten, twenty, or thirty years if requisite, until the time
comes when the European countries no longer need assistance. This
proposal is not a purely philanthropic one. In making it the United
States is just as anxious to solve her own economic problem as that of
the European Powers, for America finds herself in a position the exact
reverse to that in which Germany found herself before the war. Germany
found herself in financial difficulties because her industries made too
little profit. America is in financial difficulties because during the
war she has made too much profit. The consequence is that while her
banks are choked with money for which investments cannot be found, her
industries are producing a plethora of goods for which markets must be
found. In these difficult circumstances America has hit upon the cunning
device of lending money to the European Powers in order that they may
find themselves in a position to buy the goods which America must
produce, for production in America, as in Germany before the war, is no
longer controlled by demand but by plant. It is a Gilbertian situation
the sequel of which promises to be interesting. America lends money to
the European Powers in order that they may find themselves in a position
to buy American goods. The European Powers lend money to their
manufacturers in order that they may be in a position to produce still
more goods. But the manufacturers being persuaded that their salvation
is to be found in keeping wages down, find that while production
increases consumption will not. Hence unemployment and hence unemployed
pay, the amount of which is increased from time to time in order that
people shall be in a position to buy the goods that must be produced
until a point is reached at which a man may be well off if he won't work
but only earns a bare subsistence if he does. The period for the
repayment of loans is extended from thirty to fifty years, from fifty to
a hundred, from a hundred to a thousand years. It is an enchanting
prospect to which it is difficult to see the end, for as the tendency of
finance is increasingly centripetal it can only be saved from collapse
by a centrifugal movement which redistributes the wealth produced. If
progress is to be along these lines, a time will come when all Europe
will be living upon borrowed money and can keep on borrowing because
America fears the collapse of her economic system if she refuses to
lend.

Of course things won't work out exactly like that. Human nature would
soon come in to upset such a purely economic calculation. But it is as
logical and as probable as the deduction from any other economic theory
which disregards the moral issue. The really interesting thing about the
present situation is that it brings the modern world right up against
the problem of wealth distribution. The immediate cause of the war I
showed was due to over-production in Germany in the sense that by
allowing machinery to proceed unregulated production had got ahead of
demand and more goods were produced than the markets would absorb.
Ignoring the fact that the war was precipitated because the industrial
system before the war had reached its limit of expansion, the Government
publicists and others nevertheless advocate a policy of maximum
production as the path of economic salvation. They propose, in fact, to
reproduce in an intensified form the very conditions that brought the
war about.

Meanwhile the manifest fallacy of such a policy becomes apparent from
the fact that owing to the flood of profiteering that the war let loose
the workers have rebelled. They are refusing to produce merely to make
profits for others, and under these changed circumstances a colour is
given to the cry for increased production. But it is a false issue,
since, low as production has fallen, we produce ten, probably fifty,
times as much as is necessary for our needs, considered quantitatively.
The present system is not maintained because an enormous output is
necessary for our needs, but to effect distribution. We employ people in
unnecessary production in order that they may have the money to buy the
necessary things of which we produce too little. If any one doubts this,
let him answer the question how it came about that in the Middle Ages,
when there were no machines, the town worker earned an equivalent of
three or four pounds a week and the agricultural worker two-thirds of
that amount, taking the value of money as it existed before the war.Of
course it cannot be answered. The paradoxical situation in which we find
ourselves is due entirely to the fact that since capitalists got the
upper hand they have consistently refused to face the problem of
distribution. But truth will be out. Nemesis seems to say to the
financiers: "If ye will not distribute wealth, neither shall ye
distribute goods; and if ye do not distribute goods, neither shall ye
distribute dividends." It is not Socialists who have created this
problem, but the financiers themselves. The problem is their own making,
due to the avaricious dog-in-the-manger spirit in which they have
pursued the accumulation of wealth. While they exerted all their
energies towards increasing the volume of production, they entirely lost
sight of the fact that a day would come when their position would become
perilous unless such increase of production was accompanied by a
corresponding increase in consumption. So blind were they to this fact
that so far from seeking to increase consumption their constant thought
has been how to decrease it by reducing wages. We are up against the
logical ending of the Mercantile and Manchester School theory of
economics---that the wealth of nations is best secured by increasing
production and decreasing consumption. The Nemesis of such a false
philosophy has overtaken the world at last.

It is an open question whether a way can be found out of the present
impasse and a financial crash such as might precipitate revolution
averted. For it is to be feared that the pace at which the crisis is
developing is much faster than any possible counter-measures that could
be put into operation. But if anything at all can be done it is the
wealthy alone who can do it. If they could be induced to face the facts,
to realize that the problem is the inevitable consequence of their
policy of for ever investing and reinvesting surplus wealth for the
purposes of further increase they might be led to see that the spending
of their surplus wealth in unremunerative ways would ease the situation
if it could not forestall catastrophe. The present impasse could have
been predicted by any one who had reflected on the famous arithmetical
calculation that shows that a halfpenny put out to 5%, compound interest
on the first day of the Christian era would by now amount to more money
than the earth could contain. This calculation clearly demonstrates a
limit to the possibilities of compound interest, yet it is to such a
principle that what we call "sound finance" is committed.

# Bolshevism and the Class War

To the average Englishman Bolshevism came like a bolt from the blue. He
was sympathetic with the Russian Revolution of March, 1917. He had heard
of the Russian bureaucracy, of the secret police, of the transportations
to Siberia, etc., and he welcomed the overthrow of the Tsarist regime as
the overthrow of an intolerable tyranny. But the Revolution that put the
Bolsheviks in power he neither understood nor sympathized with, and why
the doctrine of the Class War should have spread with such lightning
rapidity over Europe and America he was entirely incapable of
comprehending. The Press, to all appearances, found itself in the same
dilemma as himself. German gold, Russian gold, Hungarian gold, have in
turn been offered as explanations for its conquests, or it is
represented as a summer madness incapable of rational explanation.

Yet such is not the case. The rise to power of the Bolsheviks and the
subsequent spread of their creed is capable of a perfectly intelligible
explanation which would have found its way into all the papers had it
been convenient to the Government to admit it. It may be true that the
Bolsheviks were at the beginning supplied with German gold. I do not
know whether it is true or not. If it were offered them I do not suppose
they would have refused it any more than they and other Russian
revolutionary anti-war exiles in Switzerland refused to travel through
Germany in the train that the Kaiser so kindly placed at their disposal;
and the German Government has proved itself so blind where psychological
issues were concerned that it is quite possible it did in the first
instance supply the Bolsheviks with the wherewithal to carry on their
propaganda. But whether they did or not does not account for the rise of
Bolshevism or the spread of it in other countries, which is finally to
be accounted for by the fact that capitalists all over the world have
refused for so long to face the facts of modern civilization, that a
point was reached at length when the "evil day," as it is called, could
no longer be postponed. Immediately, however, it was otherwise. The
Bolsheviks rose to power in Russia because, owing to the incapacity of
Kerensky and his colleagues and the political immaturity of the Russian
people, things had reached such a pass that Russia became entirely
incapable of carrying on the war successfully and was soon obliged to
accept peace on any terms. At the beginning of 1917 Russia had an army
which, though no doubt better equipped than in the first years of the
war, was still far too big. The towns were full of idle soldiery; the
railways were in imminent peril of breaking down. Some of the Tsar's
ministers came to the conclusion that the best thing to do was to
negotiate a separate peace, but the Tsar, desirous of honouring his
agreement with the Allies, objected, and so an impasse was reached.
These ministers then sought to force the hand of the Tsar by the
provocation of a sham revolution which they believed they could easily
suppress, but which they could use as an excuse for bringing the war to
an end. But things worked out differently from what they had expected.
The disorder they had provoked turned against them; instead of a mock
revolution, it proved a real one. The Provisional Government which came
into power decided to stand by the Allies. At the same time, however,
Soviets of Workmen's and Soldiers' Deputies, formed after the model of
the St. Petersburg Workmen's Soviet which was in being in the
unsuccessful Revolution of 1905, sprang up in the towns under the
leadership and control of doctrinaire Socialists who, relegating the
issue of the war to a minor position, whole-heartedly set about to
promote the progress of the Revolution. The notorious "Ordre No. I" of
the Petrograd Soviet ruined irretrievably the discipline of the army. In
consequence the great effort of national regeneration which, many people
hoped, might spring out of the Revolution and pull the country together,
became more and more remote as the first patriotic enthusiasm of the
Revolution died down. Instead, the military and economic muddle
gradually increased, until the demand of the anti-war elements for peace
negotiations began to be supported on the plea of necessity. The growing
unpopularity of Kerensky with all classes led to his downfall in
November 1917, and the Bolsheviks, who knew what they wanted and had the
energy and the armed backing to force their will on the country, came
into power.

Now it is necessary to understand that the Bolsheviks were not supported
by the garrisons and the discontented elements generally throughout the
country because of any widespread belief in the theories of Marx,but
because of the failure of the other political parties to consolidate
their authority and pursue an energetic and coherent policy. The
Bolsheviks were easily able to paralyse the feeble efforts of the
Provisional Government. At the same time they promised to save Russia by
making peace with the enemy and declaring an international war upon
capitalism. It was natural that their promises of peace, bread and
wealth should appeal to large sections of the Russian people at such a
time. The people in the towns were hungry. This fact should not be lost
sight of. There was plenty of food in Russia, but the peasants refused
to part with it for money, because money would not buy any of the things
they wanted. It had become impossible, for example, to buy a spade in
Russia. Bolshevism gathered strength in the towns because it was only by
joining the Bolshevist army that men could get food. These are the root
facts of the Russian situation upon which everything else hinges. The
later history of the Revolution has been, as might have been expected, a
record of ever greater and greater distress; opinions differ as to the
relative blame of the old regime, the Provisional Government and the
Bolsheviks for the present chaos in Russia, but this is not a point we
need enter into here. Such success as Bolshevism has had in Germany and
Austria-Hungary bears an analogy to the success in Russia to the extent
that in each case it was due to the combined influence of military
defeat, blockade, hunger in the towns and the intellectual and spiritual
bankruptcy of other parties in the State. Whether it will be finally
victorious remains to be seen. But it is important to recognize that
*Bolshevism enters to fill a vacuum*. It will come here, as to every
other country, if ever our bankruptcy of policy becomes complete. I do
not think we shall suffer from it, because it so happens that while the
governing class are clearly bankrupt of ideas there are in England other
forces of a constructive nature which gather strength daily.

Now this general bankruptcy of policy and the menace of Bolshevism are
alike due to the fact that the governing classes in this as of all
industrialized nations have consistently refused to recognize the growth
of the social problem. This refusal has been a matter of deliberate
choice, for they have been repeatedly warned of the risks they were
running, but they have turned deaf ears to all such counsel. It might be
urged in extenuation of them that the demand for reform has invariably
been associated with attacks on their position. But this cannot be said
of Ruskin, who made an appeal to the governing class which leaves them
no possible excuse. He warned them in unmistakable language that
industrial civilization was shooting the rapids.

Still nothing was done. The governing and commercial class comforted
themselves with the assurance that what Ruskin said might be true but it
was not practical. But Nemesis has waited upon them. They refused to
listen to Ruskin; they are having to listen to Marx. If Ruskin chastised
them with whips, Marx chastises them with scorpions. It cannot be said
that Ruskin has failed, for he has inspired an enormous number of
people, and I firmly believe that he will be left standing when all the
intellectually superior people who disregard him are dead and forgotten.
For Ruskin has said more things that are fundamentally and finally true
in economics than any one else. But Marx was a realist in a sense that
Ruskin was not, and to that extent was more immediately available for
political purposes. Ruskin appealed to the compassion of the governing
class; Marx realized they hadn't got any, but that while they were not
to be moved by an appeal to their better nature they could be moved by
fear. He based his calculations therefore, upon that assumption. Hence
his doctrine of the Class War, by which he hoped to transfer power from
the hands of the capitalists to those of the proletariat. While I am of
the opinion that as a policy it is finally mistaken, for the result of
preaching it has not been to create working-class solidarity but discord
everywhere,and while it distorts history to prove that class warfare has
always existed, it nevertheless rests on---a fact that is undeniably
true, namely, that under the existing economic system the interests of
capital and labour are irreconcilably opposed a fact which Ruskin
himself admitted when he said, "The art of making yourself rich, in the
ordinary mercantile economist's sense, is equally and necessarily the
art of keeping your neighbour poor." But while Marx interpreted this
fact in the terms of persons as a warfare between classes, Ruskin, on
the contrary, saw this conflict of interests as the inevitable
accompaniment of a materialist ideal of life which rejects religion and
art and their sweetening and refining influences---an interpretation
which I am persuaded is the true one. For you can construct on Ruskin's
interpretation, but not upon that of Marx, for his materialism and class
warfare end finally in producing anarchy and bitterness. They destroy
confidence and goodwill, and so finally defeat their own ends. And so it
happens that while Marx, by creating a driving force, has forced the
issue of social reconstruction to the front, experience will prove that
Ruskin laid the foundation that can be built upon, and I am persuaded he
will come into favour when reconstruction is taken seriously. For Ruskin
by keeping himself clear of class considerations provides a common
ground on which all may meet.

It was because the Bolsheviks declared the war to be a capitalist war
that their gospel spread so rapidly over Europe. In the immediate sense
this charge was untrue except in the case of Germany, who definitely
undertook the war to relieve the pressure of competition by forcing
German goods on foreign markets. But ultimately it is true, since but
for the struggle for markets and concessions that capitalism brought
with it there would have been no war. Hence it was the Bolsheviks in
declaring war on the capitalists of all nations did challenge the
reality that lay behind the war, and it was because of this that their
propaganda has been followed by such success in other countries. The
Bolsheviks touched a subconscious chord of the workers of Europe. Their
gospel found a ready response in the democracies of all countries, and
would certainly have carried all before it but for the excesses (which
there is no reason to doubt) of the Bolshevik regime in Russia. The
attempts of the governing class to prevent the spread of its doctrines
are the last word in ineptitude, and are more calculated to further them
than to destroy them. Instead of asking themselves why Bolshevism has
arisen in the world and seeking to remove the evils that are responsible
for its outbreak, they still pursue their stupid old policy of sitting
on the safety-valve and can think of nothing but repression. Now in the
face of any serious social danger, repression of extremists is
absolutely necessary in order to gain time to do the things that require
to be done, and the sincerest reformer might be driven to employ
repression at times, but there is finally no other excuse for its use.
Unless repression is accompanied by real reform, it only aggravates the
danger. He is a fool who imagines that a menace of world-wide
significance such as Bolshevism is can be stamped out merely by
repression. It can certainly be eradicated, but only by removing its
cause, which is finally to be found in the gross injustices of our
social system. Partly as a result of the Socialist agitation, and partly
as the result of external causes, of increasing economic pressure, of
motor-cars and luxury which were flaunted in the eyes of the people
before the war, the people were becoming conscious of the fact that they
were the victims of exploitation, while the outbreak of shameless
profiteering during the war converted what had hitherto been a special
grievance of the working classes into a general grievance affecting
every class of the community; for everybody except the few profiteers
are affected by the decreasing purchasing power of their earnings. No
single thing has so entirely destroyed the confidence of the people in
the good faith of the governing class as the way they allowed this abuse
to grow up. It has been the last straw that breaks the camel's back.
During the last ten years the governing class have entirely bartered
away their credit, and it can only be restored by the exercise of a
measure of magnanimity equal to their former short-sightedness. There is
no reason to suppose that such magnanimity will be exercised. Avarice
and stupidity got them into difficulties, and pride prevents them
getting out of them. In desperation, they misrepresent and heap abuse on
the working man in the hope that public opinion will rally to their
support. But such folly only makes matters worse. It goes down less and
less with the general public and increases the bitterness of the working
class, who have been patient and long-suffering. If they had not been,
things could never have reached such a pass. The governing class, to
retain power, would need to be born again in order that they might put
public interests before private interests. But they are past praying
for. There is a Turkish saying that "a herring rots from the head." It
is worth remembering when considering the chaotic state of this country.
The governing class are responsible, for with them power finally
resides. Reform must come not merely because nothing less will satisfy
the workers, but because our economic system is rapidly reaching a
deadlock. The old political game can't be played much longer.

I said that repression was no remedy for Bolshevism. As a matter of fact
it is in one sense the fruit of repression. The foundations of
Bolshevism were laid in Russia before the war by the repressive policy
of the old regime. Had the Russian Government permitted freedom of
discussion on political questions, the country would not, when the
Revolution came, have found itself so completely at the mercy of
political extremists, for the psychological factor that allowed things
in Russia so rapidly to assume an extreme form was that as political
discussion was forbidden by the old regime, both the Government and the
people lost all sense of political realities, and the overthrow of the
old regime was followed by a Babel of political opinion fatal to
reasonable judgment. If in England a more conservative spirit prevails,
it is entirely due to the fact that on the whole we have enjoyed freedom
of discussion. It is insufficiently recognized that such freedom tends
towards constitutional methods. On the other hand, while we have enjoyed
freedom of speech there have always been reactionary (I use the word in
the accepted sense) elements in English life which have been plotting
against the people, and it is owing to the gross stupidity of these
people that Bolshevism has any foothold at all among us, since apart
from their activities the extremists would not have been listened to. I
cannot say I am altogether sorry there are a few such stupid people
among us, since indirectly they have been the means of waking things up.
A Bolshevik government is a thing to be feared as the worst of all
tyrannies but it is questionable whether anything at all would get done
were the fear of Bolshevism entirely removed. A short account of the
rise of Bolshevism in England will make it clear that the "labour
unrest" has been deliberately provoked.

"In the summer of 1900 a strike broke out in South Wales on the Taff
Vale Railway, in the course of which the Company, naturally enough,
suffered a certain amount of injury. They applied to the High Court for
an injunction not only against alleged individual wrongdoers, but
against the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants itself, whose agents
these wrongdoers were. They also commenced a civil suit for damages
against the Union in its corporate capacity. To the surprise of all who
were familiar with Trade Union law and practice, and to the
consternation of the Labour world, the A.S.R.S. was mulcted, in costs
and damages, to the tune of £42,000, and it was decided that a Trade
Union could be sued in its collective capacity, and its corporate funds
made liable for a tortious act committed by any of its officials or
members who could be deemed to be its agents."

It was this judgment which was subsequently upheld by the House of Lords
that created the Labour Party. Hitherto it had never occurred to any one
to sue a Trade Union for loss of profits in the case of a strike. It was
supposed that the Trade Union Act of 1871 afforded absolute protection
to Union funds. But this judgment struck a blow at the very existence of
Trade Unionism and immediately led to the return of forty Labour members
to the House of Commons in 1906, which was speedily followed by the
passing of the Trades Disputes Acts that reversed the decision of the
Courts.

It would have been well for the governing class if they could have let
matters rest there. Once the Trades Disputes Act was passed the Labour
Party rapidly declined in influence, and so things might have remained
but for another decision of the Courts. Hitherto the Labour Party had
been financed by a levy on the members of affiliated societies, of which
the great majority were Trade Unionists. But this did not suit a
minority who held other political views. "Mr. W. V. Osborne, the
secretary of one of the branches of the Amalgamated Society of Railway
Servants, strenuously opposed the right of his Union to levy its members
or con tribute from its funds in support of the Labour Party. An action
in the Chancery Court in 1908 went in favour of the Society; but the
judges of the Court of Appeal reversed this decision, and their judgment
was finally upheld by the House of Lords."The effect of this decision
was doubtless, like the Taff Vale Judgment, very different from what the
Lords of Appeal had intended. While on the one hand the Liberal
Government found it necessary to come to the rescue of the Labour
members by introducing payment of members, on the other it took power
out of the hands of the moderate men in the Labour Movement and put it
into the hands of extremists by destroying faith in constitutional
reform. The Labour Party had secured the support of the Trade Unions by
preaching the doctrine that the ends of Labour could be better secured
through Labour representation in Parliament than by means of strikes.
But after the Osborne Judgment this idea became discredited. It became
clear that if Labour devoted its energies to reform by constitutional
means it could never be sure of its position and any victories it might
win could be snatched from it by decisions of the Courts. Hence the
advocates of direct action, who hitherto had scarcely been listened to,
became very influential. In less than a twelvemonth after the Osborne
Judgment had been upheld in the House of Lords, and as a direct
consequence of it, there came in 1911 the great strikes of the dockers,
the transport workers and the railwaymen, to be followed after a few
months by the miners. Thus was inaugurated the strike movement which
continued until the outbreak of war, when strikes were suspended only to
be revived by another piece of stupidity on the part of the powers that
be---the Munitions Act, which by penalizing official Trade Unions in the
event of a strike led to the unofficial movement known as the Shop
Stewards Movement.

Now the effect of these things---the Taff Vale Judgment, the Osborne
Judgment and the Munitions Act, combined with the evasive and
unsatisfactory policy of the Government in Labour disputes---instead of
crushing the Labour Movement, has been to turn what was a comparatively
sleepy, lethargic movement into an active fighting force by firmly
planting in the mind of Labour the conviction that a conspiracy is
abroad to defeat their demands for justice. As one interested in the
cause of Labour, I cannot express too highly my appreciation of the
services rendered to the Labour Movement by the Courts, since in a few
years, through their folly, they have accomplished more in the way of
vitalizing the movement than a century of agitators. But the question is
now whether the pursuit of such folly can any longer serve a useful
purpose, for a suspicion gains ground that if ever confidence is to be
restored, action will have to be taken against the lawyers. It is not
only through the decisions of the Courts that they create bad blood, but
through more direct industrial activity. Since the spread of limited
liability companies they have become more closely associated with the
administration of industry than was the case before, and they have
created endless trouble by pursuing everything in a purely legal spirit.
Wherever they make their appearance, good faith can no longer be taken
for granted. If an agreement is made with Labour, they do not interpret
it in the spirit in which it was intended, but according to the letter.
They take their stand on what is written, and set about to discover
loopholes, and there are always lawyers ready to place their services at
the disposal of any capitalist who wants to evade things. And the Courts
back them up in this kind of thing. They do not take their stand on the
broad principle, but upon what some phrase can be twisted to mean. No
wonder Labour is suspicious. It has every reason to be. It under stands
straightforward dealing and can respect an enemy who is open in his
dealings, but this kind of twisting and twining is a constant source of
irritation and distrust, provocative of trouble. When the Government
intervenes in any Labour trouble, it too finds itself at the mercy of
these legal influences in the bureaucracy, which, affected only by
documents, appears to be mentally incapable of sensing a situation. If
the law is being brought into contempt, it is the lawyers who are to
blame.

To suspect the lawyers as the *agents provocateurs* of Labour unrest is
not unreasonable, for history teaches us that, directly or indirectly,
the lawyers have been at the bottom of every rising since Roman Law was
revived. Considering that Roman Law corrupted every Mediaeval
institution and changed government from being an instrument of
protection into an instrument of exploitation, it is to be maintained
that the growth of class hatred in the deeper and more fundamental sense
is finally to be laid to its charge. Mediaeval society was organized on
a basis of reciprocal rights and duties a man sacrificed his rights who
did not perform his duties. But Roman Law changed all this. It made
rights absolute which had been conditional, while it made duties
optional. It became the friend of property and the enemy of the people.
There are many reasons to suppose that Roman Law as it existed under the
Roman Empire was animated by an entirely different spirit from that
which animated the lawyers of the revival. Roman Law was not promoted in
Rome to further exploitation, but came into existence to hold together a
corrupt society which had been rendered unstable by capitalism, and as
such its spirit was opportunist. There are strong reasons for supposing
that it was in this spirit that the Roman jurists gave legal sanction to
private property as the easiest way of avoiding conflict between
neighbours, for they did not, like the Mediaeval lawyers, seek to
enslave the people by the destruction of communal rights. On the
contrary, while one of the first measures taken by the Emperors was to
place restrictions on the formation of voluntary organizations because
under the Republic they had been used as a basis of conspiracy, no
obstacle was placed in the path of the formation of such organizations
when the danger had passed away. As early as the reign of Antoninus Pius
the Collegia which undertook public functions were incorporated by
Imperial charter, and the custom of incorporating them was followed by
later Emperors. The same thing happened with respect to the treatment of
slaves. While the Mediaeval jurists were devising means for the
reintroduction of slavery, the Roman jurists did their best to humanize
the institution. Under the Republic and early Empire, the right of the
owner over the slave was absolute, but after the Antonines restrictions
were placed on the rights of owners, and provisions made which
facilitated the manumission of slaves.

It was not from the spirit of the Roman jurists that the trouble appears
to have arisen, but from the fact that the revival of Roman Law was in
the first place a revival of the Justinian Code, which rested on a
theory of absolute individual ownership of property. It was this that
brought it into collision with the Mediaeval usage under which community
of ownership, or at any rate community of use, was the prevalent custom.
It was because of this that the Roman Law of the revival became
individualistic, provocative and corrupt, was promoted as an instrument
of oppression and has been used as such ever since. It is the central
canker in our society---the active promoter of class hatred, as
decisions of the Courts have shown.

This is no idle theory. There is no book that enjoys to-day a greater
popularity among the workers than Mr Paul's book *The State*,the whole
purpose of which is to show that State Socialists have failed to
understand the nature and function of the State, inasmuch as from the
earliest times it has been an instrument of capitalist exploitation and
cannot therefore be used for the purposes of reconstruction. Though the
theory he maintains suffers from exaggeration, it is important to
recognize that the central idea of the book has the support of at least
one Lord Chancellor, for when Sir Thomas More asked the question, "What
is Government?" and answered it by saying that it is "a certain
conspiracy of rich men procuring their own commodities under the name
and title of the Common Wealth," he said precisely the same thing as our
Bolsheviks are saying to-day. If I differ from them, it is not in
respect to what exists, but as to the remedy to be applied. It is true,
as our Bolsheviks maintain, that the State from a very early date has
existed as an instrument of exploitation. But it does not follow from
this that the evils consequent upon such exploitation are to be remedied
by seeking the destruction of the State, for that would be merely to
precipitate chaos. Moreover, the State cannot be destroyed, as the
Bolsheviks in Russia have found, for in spite of all the abuse of power
associated with it, it does perform a function which at all times is
indispensable, the function of protection, of maintaining order.
Recognizing that to-day this function is exercised in the interests of
the wealthy, the problem that presents itself is how the State may be so
transformed that it protects the workers against the exploiters instead
of, as is the case to-day, the exploiters against the workers. This, I
contend, is possible by seeking the abolition of Roman Law, since it was
the means of corrupting the State, and replacing it by Mediaeval
Communal Law. In proportion as this could be done, the spirit of the
State would be changed. Instead of usurping all functions, it would
delegate them to communal groups of workers organized into Guilds.
Instead of being the overwhelming and dominating power it is to-day, it
would, stripped of its illegitimate functions, become as it was in the
Middle Ages, one power among a plurality of powers. Such a policy, I
contend, is more in harmony with the historical law formulated by Marx,
"that every new social system develops its embryo within the womb of the
old system," than that advocated by his followers. For whereas such a
policy would effect a complete transformation of society by action from
within, their policy seeks only destruction from without.

# The Path to the Guilds

It is a commonplace of modern thought to say that "we cannot put the
clock back." But if recorded history has any one single lesson to teach
us more than another, it is precisely, as Mr. Chesterton has said, that
we can. Twice in European history has it been done. The first time was
when Christianity restored the communal basis of society after it had
been destroyed by the capitalism of Greece and Rome, and the second was
when this communal basis of Mediaeval society in turn was destroyed and
capitalism re-established by the revival of Roman Law.The recent
admission of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that ministers are so
overwhelmed with the details of administration that they have no time to
think, suggests to the student of history that before long the clock
will need to be put back again. For it is manifest that the process of
centralization that has been continuous since the reign of Henry II has
at last reached a point beyond which it can proceed no farther, since
the Government is confessedly at the mercy of forces it cannot control.
In these circumstances there is but one thing to be done---to substitute
control from without by control from within; or, in other words, to
restore the communal basis of society that Roman Law destroyed.

It would be fortunate for us if this simple truth could become
acknowledged, as no single thing would be wrought with such far-reaching
consequences and prevent so much human suffering. A frank acceptance of
the principle of reversion would enable us to arrive at the new social
order by means of orderly progression, and would prevent the bloodshed
that is the inevitable consequence of a refusal to face the facts. The
danger that confronts us is precisely the same as confronted France on
the eve of the Revolution. It is the danger that a popular though
unconscious movement back to Medievalism may be frustrated by
intellectuals whose eyes are turned in the opposite direction, and
revolution be precipitated by the fact that the instinctive impulses of
the people, instead of being guided into their proper channels where
they would bear fruit a thousandfold, will be brought into collision
with doctrinaire idealists who believe in economic evolution as it is
not. The average man to-day in his conscious intelligence will subscribe
to modernism in some degree, but his instinctive actions are always in
the direction of a return to Mediaevalism. This fact is illustrated by
the arrival of the Trade Union Movement, which was well described by Mr.
Chesterton as "a return to the past by men ignorant of the past, like
the subconscious action of some man who has lost his memory." The
circumstance that the Guild propaganda finds such ready support among
Trade Unionists is not due to the economic theories associated with it.
Such could not be the case, for not one person in a thousand understands
economics. The Guild idea is successful because it is in harmony with
the popular psychology. It attacks the wage system and directs attention
to the danger of the Servile State---evils with which every working man
is familiar---while it presents him with a vision of a new social order
in which he may take pleasure in his work. These are the things that
have promoted the success of the Guild idea. Approving of such aims, the
majority are willing to take its economics for granted as things beyond
their understanding. They swallow them without tasting them; just as a
previous generation swallowed Collectivist theories without tasting them
because Socialists held out promises of a co-operative commonwealth.
Those who deny this contention must explain why, if such was not the
case, Socialists rebelled against Collectivism when they discovered
where it was leading them. If they had understood its economic theories
they would have known its destination all along, and would no more have
thought about rebelling against it than does Mr. Sidney Webb. Mr. Webb
does not rebel against it, because he understands it. I am inclined to
think he is the only man who understands Collectivism and believes in
it. At any rate he is the only Collectivist I ever met who was prepared
to accept the deductions from his premises.

While on the one hand we have in the Trade Union Movement evidence of an
instinctive effort by men to return to Medievalism in their capacity as
producers, we have in the present outcry against profiteering and the
demand for a fixed and Just Price evidence of an instinctive effort of
men to return to Mediaevalism in their capacity as consumers. It is
important that this should be recognized, for the Trade Union Movement
and the movement against profiteering are the upper and nether
millstones between which capitalism is going to be ground and the Guilds
restored. The movement against profiteering, again, is not due to any
leanings towards Mediaeval economics. On the contrary, it is purely
instinctive. Just as the Trade Union Movement owes its origin to the
instinct of self-preservation of producers, so the demand for the Just
Price owes its origin to the instinct of self-preservation of consumers.
Yet both are movements back to Mediaevalism. And so in respect to all of
our other ideas of reform: they all imply reversion to the past. What is
democracy but a form of government that existed among all primitive
peoples? What is the proposal to nationalize the land but a reversion to
the oldest known form of land tenure? What is the demand for a more
equitable distribution of wealth but a reversion to pre-capitalist
conditions of society? What does the substitution of production for use
for production for profit and the abolition of poverty imply but the
reversion to a state of things that existed before such evils came into
existence? They are all borrowed from the past, and imply the creation
of a social order the exact antithesis of our present one. But our
reformers will not have it. They do not take the trouble to carry their
ideas to their logical conclusion, and so continue to imagine that all
such ideas may be grafted upon modern industrialism and finance which is
built upon their denial and is finally antipathetic to them. The result
is as might be expected. Modern attempts at reform invariably produce
the opposite effect to that intended, or if they remedy one evil, it is
but to create another. Instead of being stepping-stones to the
millennium, they prove to be the paved way to the Servile State. The
discovery of this leads the workers to rebel; they become suspicious of
intellectual leadership, and generally speaking the suspicion is
justified, for the intellectuals have misled them. Their prejudice
against the past is the root of the whole trouble. If we could get rid
of this prejudice it would be easy to bridge the gulf between the
workers and intellectuals. They would pull together, and we should get
real leadership because we should get understanding. It is easy to
understand the modern world if you visualize it from the Mediaevalist
standpoint, but impossible from the modernist, as the constant change of
intellectual fashions clearly demonstrates. Yet though the modernist can
find certainty nowhere, he still clings tenaciously to the belief that
modernism cannot be entirely wrong.

But even when the modernist is convinced of the truth of Mediaeval
principles he hesitates to give them his adherence because he
experiences a difficulty in basing any practical activity upon them. But
that is only a temporary difficulty, and would disappear if Mediaeval
principles were more generally accepted. Still that is not the issue for
which we are immediately contending. The vital issue is not finally
whether Mediaeval principles can be applied in detail, but that the
neglect of them leads modernists to put their trust in measures that are
foredoomed to failure, while it blinds them to the significance of
movements of popular origin because of false *a priori* ideas. It would
be just as unreasonable for an engineer to ignore the laws of physics
because he found it difficult to apply them with mathematical precision
in a complex structure as it is for Socialists to ignore Mediaeval
economics because they cannot always be immediately applied. For just as
a knowledge of the laws of physics keeps the engineer straight within
certain limits by telling him what can and what cannot be done, so a
knowledge of Mediaeval economics would keep Socialists straight within
certain limits, and by relating all their schemes to a central and
coordinating philosophy prevent them from making fundamental errors. It
is precisely because men who become immersed in the details of politics
are apt to lose sight of first principles that it is so necessary to
keep insisting upon them. Above all, a familiarity with the Mediaeval
philosophy and point of view would give them some insight into the
psychology of the people, who, in spite of all appearances to the
contrary, are Medievalists still.

It is because I feel so much the desirability of a *rapprochement*
between intellectuals and the workers that I so strongly urge the
importance of Mediaeval ideas. The tragedy of the situation is that we
live in an age that cries out for leadership and no leaders are
forthcoming, nor are there likely to be any so long as the modernist
philosophy prevails, since it erects an insurmountable barrier between
the workers and their rightful leaders. Here I would observe that my
comments are just as true of working-class intellectuals as of those of
the middle class, for the working class that reads has been fed on the
self-same false philosophies. In so far as working-class culture differs
from middle-class culture, it is apt to be harder and narrower; this is
where the real danger lies. When I say that the danger confronting us is
precisely the same as that which confronted France on the eve of the
Revolution---in that chaos may be precipitated by the fact that the
workers and the intellectuals are pulling different ways---it is to
working-class rather than middle-class intellectuals that I refer, since
the Neo-Marxian intellectuals are the only modernists sufficiently
convinced of the truth of their creed to be capable of determined action
in the event of a crisis. The leadership must fall into their hands,
unless in the meantime the Medievalist position can secure wide
acceptance, since apart from such acceptance reformers generally will
remain blind to the significance of present-day developments that are
finally the result of their teaching, but which do not receive
recognition because they come in unexpected forms from unexpected
quarters. We look to things coming to us from the east and they come to
us from the west. And so the very things which might remove impossible
barriers from our path are treated with suspicion and rejected.

The Profiteering Act is a case in point. Owing to the fact that the
minds of Socialists are filled with the *a priori* theory of social
evolution, which teaches them that industry is to get into fewer and
fewer hands until a time comes at length when it will be taken over by
the State, they have entirely missed the significance of this Act, which
points to a very different conclusion. From the point of view of the
average Socialist it is nothing more than a measure of temporary
expediency advocated by the Northcliffe Press and adopted by the
Government as a means of satisfying popular clamour and of postponing
the day of substantial reform. But to the Guildsman it wears a different
aspect. While he is not prepared to dispute that such motives led to its
enactment, he sees in the effort to fix prices a revival of the central
economic idea of the Middle Ages. History teaches him it is an idea with
great potentialities and may, if advantage is taken of it by reformers,
lead to results very different from those intended. The control of
prices, he is persuaded, is a precedent condition of success in any
effort to secure economic reform, inasmuch as until prices are fixed it
is impossible to plan or arrange anything that may not be subsequently
upset by fluctuations of the markets. It is a necessary preliminary to
secure the unearned increment for the community, since until prices are
fixed it will always be possible for the rich to resist attempts to
reduce them by transferring any taxation imposed upon them to the
shoulders of other members of the community. Moreover, as the
Profiteering Act seeks the co-operation of local authorities, it should
operate to promote a revival of local life. Where local authorities have
fallen into the hands of shopkeepers, the shopkeepers will be compelled
to act in the public interest or be cleared out. Thus the moral issue
will become one of paramount importance, and this will pave the way for
the arrival of the Just Price, for the people will never be satisfied
with a fixed price that is not finally a Just Price. As in the Middle
Ages the Guilds owed their existence as economic organizations to the
desire for a Just Price, it is reasonable to suppose that once the
Government is committed to a policy of regulating prices the restoration
of the Guilds can only be a matter of time. Apart from Guilds, it may be
possible to fix the prices of a few staple articles of general use, but
experience must prove that this is as far as things will go, for there
is a limit to the successful application of the principle of control
from without. The fixing of prices throughout industry necessitates
control from within, and this involves a return to the Guilds.

But the Profiteering Act has other implications. It raises the questions
of agriculture, landlordism and Roman Law. It is evident that any fixing
of prices throughout industry depends ultimately upon our capacity to
fix the price of food, and this must remain impossible so long as we are
dependent upon foreign supplies of food. Hence the attempt to fix prices
leads to the revival of agriculture. The question as to whether with our
large population we shall or shall not ever be able to be entirely
independent of such supplies is not the issue. We should aim at being as
independent as possible, since the nearer we approach to such a
condition, the more stable our economic arrangements will become. The
movement towards such a revival should be reinforced by the national
urgency of correcting the discrepancy between imports and exports.
Before the war, the excess of imports was a matter of no concern, as it
represented the returns on our foreign investments and the earnings of
our mercantile marine, but nowadays, when our foreign investments have
been sold to pay for munitions and our mercantile marine reduced, it is
a different matter. It means we are living on capital, that the country
is being drained of its economic resources, and that this discrepancy
must be corrected if we are to avoid national bankruptcy. The politician
and industrialist, looking at this problem, cry aloud for increased
production, meaning thereby an increase in the production of industrial
wares. But this, as I have shown, is no solution, for the markets of the
world cannot absorb an increased production. Yet there is a sense in
which they are right. We do not want an increase of secondary production
such as they urge upon us, but we do need an increase of primary
production. We need an increase of agricultural produce. This is the one
direction in which an increase of output is immediately practicable, and
it would react to our economic advantage. For not only would it, by
decreasing our imports of food, tend to correct the balance between
imports and exports, but it would provide an increased home market for
our industrial wares. It would increase our national independence and
lay for us a firm economic base on which we could proceed to build. We
could then begin to fix prices with some assurance that what we did
would not be upset by the action of some Food Trust beyond the seas. The
fleeting nature of the prosperity built upon foreign trade is in these
days being brought home to us. The experience of Carthage and Athens, of
Venice and Genoa, of Hanseatic Germany and of the Dutch, is becoming our
experience. A time came in the life of these States when they found
themselves at the mercy of forces they were powerless to control, and so
it is with us. There is no way out of the impasse in which we find
ourselves but to restore to society the base that was destroyed by the
tyranny of landlordism on the one hand and the shibboleth of Free Trade
on the other. If a revival of agriculture is to be of real benefit to
society, life in the country must be made attractive again and the
agricultural worker be properly paid, and I would add he should not be
paid less than the equivalent of what he was able to earn in the Middle
Ages, which at the pre-war value of money would not be less than three
pounds a week. No doubt this will appear entirely impracticable to our
"practical" reformers whose habit of mind it is to put expediency before
principle. But I am assured that the great increase of demand in the
home market created by such well-paid workers would speedily react to
the advantage of the community by relieving the pressure of com petition
in the towns. We should soon find that a prosperous peasantry was our
greatest economic asset. Raising the wages of agricultural workers
would, moreover, by putting the labourers on their feet, pave the way
for the organization of agriculture on a Guild basis. As an intermediate
step, however, it would perhaps be necessary to work for small holdings
and restored common lands, a combination of which would not unlikely
prove to be the most satisfactory form of land-holding. But in no case
should ownership of land be absolute. On the contrary, land should be
held conditionally upon its cultivation and owned by the local
authorities, an arrangement I suggest as an alternative to land
nationalization because it avoids the evils of bureaucracy.

So self-evident may appear the policy I recommend that the question
naturally arises, Why is it not adopted? The answer is because the
revival of agriculture raises the land question, and that touches the
governing class in a very tender place. The outcry that any proposal to
tax the land immediately raises is not due to the fact that it touches
the wealthy in their economic stronghold, for the money power is in
these days infinitely more powerful than the land power, but because it
attacks the honour of the governing class. All the great landowners are
in possession of stolen property, and it is said that a great part of
such lands have no proper title-deeds. When Mr. Smillie raised this
question at the recent Coal Commission he raised a very pertinent one.
But he neglected a stronger line of attack. Instead of asking whether
the lands held by the dukes had proper title-deeds, he ought to have
asked how it came about that any land possessed title-deeds; whether it
was in the interests of the community for men to enjoy privileges
without corresponding responsibilities; and how it came about that
landlords found themselves in this irresponsible position to-day. These
questions would have raised the really fundamental issues; for no men
were in this position before the revival of Roman Law.

It has been the misfortune of the land question that its fundamental
importance has been disregarded because it has been associated with
moribund solutions of its problems. Every one with a practical knowledge
of the circumstances of agriculture and building knew very well that the
taxation of land values, though theoretically justifiable, would be
followed by consequences very different from those intended. We are
paying in the housing shortage to-day for the Land Campaign of 1909---a
fact that has been obscured by the circumstance that the war has
rendered cottage-building an uneconomic proposition. If land reformers
had been as keen on reviving agriculture, for which they professed
concern, as they were for securing the unearned increment of city sites,
they would never have fallen into the economic fallacies they did, for
in that case they would have begun by enquiring into the circumstances
of agriculture, and have made its revival their primary concern. But it
has unfortunately happened that while agricultural reformers have
shirked the land question, those who have attacked it have had their
eyes fixed upon urban values. So land reform has fallen between two
stools, and will remain so until the reformers wake up to the fact that
the land question is fundamental to all their schemes.

It is a paradox, but I believe it is nevertheless true, that it is this
tradition of reformers approaching the problem of reconstruction from
the point of view of unearned increment, or surplus value, to use
Marxian terminology, that in the past has been their undoing. With their
eyes for ever fixed on the money that goes into the pockets of others
who have no moral right to it, they incline to approach problems in a
ruthless mechanical way that entirely disregards circumstances. These
circumstances in turn have a way of defeating them, for problems are to
be attacked along the line of their growth and finally in no other way.
The root fallacy that leads reformers to be thus for ever attacking
problems in the wrong way is that they have fallen into the error of
making economics rather than law and morals the starting-point of their
enquiries. It is this that has led them to the Collectivist way of
thinking, that supposes the solution of the social problem to be nothing
more than a matter of detailed arrangements---a way of thinking that has
survived the formal rejection of Collectivist theories, and which is
still believed in by the Neo-Marxians. For their quarrel with the
Fabians, as with us, is immediately a quarrel about time. Without any
conception of the organic nature of society, they demand an immediate
solution of its problems They want the millennium at once, and have no
patience with us because we do not believe it possible to improvise a
new social system the day after the revolution. Though they profess to
take their stand upon history, they are strangely oblivious to its
lessons. For if there is one lesson more than another that it teaches,
it is that organic changes are not brought about in a catastrophic way.
On the contrary, catastrophes, in which history abounds, are invariably
followed by long periods of social disorder and chaos, and only
indirectly can be said to lead to any kind of good, in that experience
proves that men will often listen to the voice of truth in suffering
that they scorned in their days of prosperity. Yet the neo-Marxians are
so eager for the millennium that they seek catastrophe as a means of
realizing it.

There is another lesson that history teaches that the Marxians do not so
much ignore as deny---that evils are never conquered before they are
*understood* and faced in the right spirit. The history of Greece and
Rome abounds in revolutions, but the revolutionaries were unable to
abolish the evils consequent upon an unregulated currency, because they
did not understand *how* to suppress them. Plato might realize that the
technical remedy was to be found in a system of fixed prices, but the
moral atmosphere necessary to reduce such an idea to practice was absent
in Greek society, and so his suggestion was ignored. It was not until
Christianity had entirely transformed the spirit of society by replacing
the individualistic temper of Pagan society by the spirit of human
brotherhood that a solution was found in the institution of the Just
Price as maintained by the Guilds. Similarly the transition from
Mediaeval to modern society, from communism to individualism, did not
come about owing to some inexorable law of social evolution, but because
the moral sanction of Mediaeval society was gradually undermined by the
lawyers and their Roman Law. They undermined the communal spirit that
sustained the Guilds by affirming the right of every man to buy in the
cheapest market and to sell in the dearest, while they transformed
Feudalism into landlordism by denying the Mediaeval theory of reciprocal
rights and duties, and exalting the rights of the individual at the
expense of those of the community. What Marxians call social evolution
is nothing more or less than the social and economic consequences of
such teaching---a truth which even they instinctively recognize, for
they are not content to leave the coming of the millennium to the blind
workings of the historic process about which they are so eloquent, but
seek to promote it by inculcating the doctrines of class-consciousness
into the minds of the workers. There is nothing inevitable about social
changes. The direction can at any time be changed where there is the
will and the understanding. But for the revival of Roman Law and the
immoral teachings associated with it, European society would have
continued to develop on Mediaeval lines to this day as indeed it
continued to develop in Asia and remained until European capitalism
began to undermine it.

Recognizing, then, that all societies are finally the expression or
materialization of their dominant philosophy, and that when in the
Middle Ages communal relationships obtained they were sustained by the
teachings of Christianity, the question may reasonably be asked whether
the policy we advocate does not imply a return to Christianity; must not
reformers return to the churches? The answer is that this would be the
case if the churches taught Christianity as it was understood by the
Early Christians. But such is not the case. The churches in the past
made terms with the mammon of unrighteousness, and though it is true
that they are changing, we have to recognize that they are changing in
response to the rebellion against capitalism from without rather than
from any movement from within at any rate in so far as their attitude
towards social questions is concerned. If the churches had taken the
lead in attacking capitalism, there would be a case for joining them,
but considering that they did not, and are so much bound up with the
existing order, to advocate such a policy would not only lead to endless
misunderstanding, but would hamper us in the immediate work that
requires to be done. Hitherto Guildsmen have approached the problem from
one particular angle. They have sought to transform the Trade Unions
into Guilds by urging upon the latter a policy of encroaching control.
This policy is good as far as it goes. But it is not the only thing that
requires to be done. It is not only necessary to approach the problem of
establishing Guilds from the point of view of the producer; it is
equally necessary to approach it from the point of view of the consumer.
For this reason I would urge that we should not neglect the new weapon
that the Profiteering Act has placed in our hands. Let us recognize the
significance of this Act as giving legal sanction to the central
economic idea of the Middle Ages. Let us study its implications and make
the working of the Act the basis of activities that will lead step by
step on the one hand to the revival of agriculture and the abolition of
landlordism, and on the other to the return of the Guilds. For if the
public can be persuaded of the desirability of Guilds from the point of
view of consumers, half our battle would be won. The movement from above
would join hands with the movement from below and Guilds arise naturally
from the union.

Meanwhile those whom personal bias leads to a consideration of the more
fundamental propositions underlying the problem of reconstruction should
be urged to concentrate their energies upon the abolition of Roman Law.
Such an attack would tend to create the kind of intellectual back ground
of which the Reform Movement stands so much in need. It would in the
first place prevent the Guild Movement from getting side-tracked by
counteracting the pernicious influence of the Marxian interpretation of
history. In the next it would impress upon the minds of people the idea
that social and economic changes are preceded by changes in ideas. Then
it would demonstrate the primacy of law over economics; and lastly it
would bring Mediaeval ideas into a direct relationship with the modern
thought, because it so happens that it is impossible to attack Roman Law
without at the same time affirming Mediaeval principles.Law is the link
between morals and economics as it is between philosophy and politics
and between industrialism and militarism. To attack Roman Law is
therefore to attack the modern system at a very vital and strategic
point. It would create a force that would restore the communal spirit of
the Middle Ages. For after all there are only two types of society that
have existed since currency was introduced the capitalist civilizations
of Greece and Rome and of modern Europe and America that did not control
currency, and the communal societies of Mediaeval Europe and Asia that
did. There is, finally, no third type of society, inasmuch as all
societies conform to one or other of these types, differing only to the
extent that in different societies emphasis is given to different
aspects of them. Hence it is reasonable to suppose that as the
capitalist civilization of Rome was followed by the communal
civilization of Mediaevalism, the reaction against capitalism to-day
will carry us along to a future where the promise of the Middle Ages
will be fulfilled.
