## Foreword

The larger part of the material in this book consists of a
series of sixty-six articles which were published in *The
Daily News Record of New York* under the general title of
"The National Advertisers, the Distributors, and the
Public." The remainder consists of material which it proved
inappropriate to publish serially in a daily newspaper.

So many friends and acquaintances have helped me in this
work that it is impractical I was almost going to say
impolitic for me to acknowledge my indebtedness by formally
naming them. I cannot, however, omit a word of appreciation
for the farsighted policy displayed in making the columns of
*The Daily News Record* an open forum for the discussion of
this tremendously important subject.

One thought and I am through. This book is iconoclastic only
in the strictest sense of the term. The methods which I
criticize, I have here criticized in the hope that they will
soon cease to be factors in marketing. I would have them
destroyed for the same reason that the builders of better
buildings tear down the structures on the sites where they
purpose to build. I would have national advertising replaced
by national marketing, the advertising expert become a
marketing engineer, and a real profession replace the
present all too commercial advertising expert a profession
which would seek to make the marketing of all products more
and more efficient and less and less costly to the
commonwealth.

**Ralph Borsodi.**

# National Advertising vs. Prosperity

## Part I. Economic Consequences of National Advertising

*We have now reached a point where it costs more to
distribute and serve than it does to produce... Commodity
values are lost in a mass of service costs, and the time has
come for a consideration of the fundamental problem of the
economic distribution of the essentials of
living.---Congressional Commission on Agricultural Inquiry.*

**National Advertising: What it is and What it is not.**

*National advertising*, Advertising by a manufacturer,
irrespective of the mediums utilized, which is addressed to
ultimate consumers for the purpose of creating
consumer-demand sufficient to force, or at least assist, in
inducing retailers to stock the advertiser's product.
Synonym, consumer advertising.

*Trade advertising*, Advertising by a manufacturer or by a
wholesaler, irrespective of the mediums utilized, addressed
to those in the trade who are prospective buyers of the
advertiser's product either for the purpose of reselling it
or to use it in manufacturing or further fabrication.

*Retail advertising*, Advertising by a merchant,
irrespective of the mediums utilized, for the purpose of
securing new customers and holding the patronage of those
customers who already trade with the advertiser.

### I. National Advertising

During the year 1923 the probable expenditures of
advertisers in national advertising will be around
\$500,000,000.

Year by year the expenditure has been increasing.

It is difficult to estimate accurately the rate of increase,
but if we assume it to be substantially the same as the rate
of increase of the advertising inserted in leading magazines
of the country, we shall probably come very near the actual
rate.

In 1915 advertisers spent \$38,737,336 in 76 monthly and
weekly magazines, women's publications and farm journals. In
1916 they spent \$51,867,803 in 77 publications; in 1917, in
the same number of publications, \$57,793,628; in 1918, in
72 publications, \$61,312,888; in 1919, it was \$97,208,791;
in 1920, it was \$132,414,799.

This would indicate that the expenditure was more than
trebling itself every five years. As, however, the year 1921
(the year of deflation), showed a reduction in advertising
in these publications to \$95,439,236, this rate would be
too high.

A very conservative estimate based upon these figures would
be that the expenditure more than doubles itself every five
years.

This means that if the expenditure for national advertising
was \$500,000,000 in 1920, that it will be \$1,000,000,000
in the year 1925; \$2,000,000,000 in 1930; \$4,000,000,000
in 1935; \$8,000,000,000 in 1940, and so on ad infinitum to
the advertising millennium.

Even those who have carefully observed the growth of
national advertising and who have noted from year to year
the growth of the circulations of the national mediums, the
increases in the amount of advertising in them, and the
sizes of spaces used by individual advertisers, find it
difficult to visualize the magnitude of the industry which
may ultimately be devoted to national advertising. It is
already an industry that has attracted thousands of the
ablest minds of the country, and diverted from other more
productive industries great armies of workers in paper
making, printing, engraving and allied fields. The raw
materials used in the industry, the pulp wood, coal, lead,
copper, zinc, represent great drafts upon the natural
resources of the earth.

Through the courtesy of The Curtis Publishing Company, of
Philadelphia, **printers' ink** was enabled to make public a
list showing the sums spent by fifty leading national
advertisers in thirty-six publications in the year 1921.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
  Name                        Principal Products         Amount
  --------------------------- -------------------------- -------------
  Joseph Campbell Co.         Campbell's Soup            \$1,316,095

  Victor Talking Machine Co.  Victrolas                  \$1,239,693

  Procter & Gamble Co.        Ivory Soap, Crisco         \$1,198,458

  The Congoleum Co.           Congoleum Rugs             \$783,431

  Swift & Company             Swift's Premium Ham        \$694,600

  The Pepsodent Co.           Pepsodent Tooth Paste      \$680,770

  California Ass'd Raisin Co. Sun Maid Raisins           \$659,635

  Lever Bros. Co.             Lux, Lifebuoy Soap, Rinso  \$646,277

  The Barrett Company         Barrett Roofing            \$612,249

  Colgate & Company           Tooth Paste FAB            \$596,781

  Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.  Tires                      \$593,685

  Fels & Company              Fels Naptha Soap           \$583,510

  The Quaker Oats Co.         Quaker Oats, Puffed wheat  \$553,892

  Eastman Kodak Co.           Kodaks                     \$553,375

  Cudahy Packing Co.          Old Dutch Cleanser         \$543,090

  The Palmolive Company       Palmolive Soap             \$524,797

  Columbia Graphophone Co.    Columbia Graphophones      \$497,411

  Andrew Jergens Co.          Woodbury's Soap            \$484,885

  Vacuum Oil Co.              Mobiloil                   \$479,464

  Postum Cereal Co. Inc.      Postum, Post Toasties      \$466,312

  Lehn & Fink, Inc.           Pebeco, Lysol              \$448,250

  The R. L. Watkins Co.       Emulsified Coconut Oil     \$438,682
                              Shampoo                    

  Corn Prod. Refining Co.     Karo, Mazola               \$429,506

  The Fleischmann Co.         Fleischmann's Yeast        \$419,872

  Northwestern Yeast Co.      Magic Yeast                \$390,070

  Famous Players-Lasky Corp   Paramount Pictures         \$385,250

  U. S. Rubber Company        Keds, U. S. Tires          \$382,523

  Alfred H. Smith Co.                                    \$371 205

  American Radiator Co.       Radiators and Boilers      \$370,801

  Johns-Manville, Inc.        Asbestos Products          \$369,580

  Dodge Brothers Co.          Podge Automobiles          \$369,132

  The Bon Ami Co.             Bon Ami                    \$350,387

  Cream of Wheat Co.          Cream of Wheat             \$348,770

  Armstrong Cork Co.          Armstrong's Linoleums      \$345,903

  Southern Cotton Oil Trad.                              \$339,246
  Co.                                                    

  General Electric Co.        Electrical Appliances      \$333,642

  Thomas A. Edison, Inc.      Edison Phonographs         \$326,471

  Pompeian Company            Pompeian Massage Cream     \$311,591

  Union Carbide & Carbon                                 \$309,993
  Corp.                                                  

  Brunswick-Balke-Collender   Phonographs                \$302,975
  Co.                                                    

  International Silver Co.    Rogers 1847 Silverware     \$302,200

  Firestone Tire & Rubber Co.                            \$302,027

  United Drug Company         Rexall Remedies            \$300,222

  General Cigar Co. Inc       Cigars                     \$286,460

  Morris & Company            Meat Products              \$282,030

  Hart Schaffner & Marx       Men's Clothes              \$279,407

  LaSalle Extension           Correspondence Courses     \$277,942
  University                                             

  Maxwell-Chalmers Co.        Automobiles                \$272,200

  Calfornia Fruit Growers Ex. Sunkist Oranges            \$265,106

  Hupp Motor Car Corp.        Automobiles                \$264,500
  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Total of these advertisers in the thirty-six magazines
reviewed: \$23,884,372

This compilation does not, of course, include the total
advertising expenditure of the concerns listed. It
represents their expenditures in only thirty-six magazines
to begin with, and includes none of their expenditures in
the other general magazines, in newspapers, farm papers,
theatre programs, direct-mail, window-displays, novelties,
premiums, motion pictures, slides, directories, signs and
other mediums.

The expenditure of a single one of these national
advertisers for a single piece of "copy" running in a list
of magazines today is greater than the total expenditures of
many advertisers in a whole year ten years ago.

When it is not unusual to spend \$17,000 for the insertion
of one advertisement in one magazine, it is easy to believe
that in the infancy of national advertising this sum was
greater than the total annual appropriations of many
advertisers.

The national magazines had at that time circulations that
hovered around the 100,00 mark. Bates that were around \$1
per line were high rates, which magazine solicitors worked
hard to justify to the advertisers.

Today circulations range around the 1,000,000 mark.
Advertising rates of \$10 and \$12 per line are being
justified with probably less difficulty than rates of
one-tenth that amount 20 years ago.

Is this enormous development of national advertising a good
thing for others than those who may directly profit from it?

A careful reading of the books upon advertising and of the
writings in the trade press devoted to advertising shows
that up to the present time those who have given thought to
the matter very generally assume that *since national
advertising has proven profitable to many national
advertisers, it is therefore beneficial to business as a
whole.*

It is generally assumed that national advertising, which is
in certain lines of merchandise extremely profitable, can be
profitably used to exploit all lines of merchandise. Some
time ago an advertising agency headed a double page
advertisement in **printer's ink** with this challenge to
manufacturers who felt their product could not be
advertised: "Is There Anything Unadvertisable?"

Most advertising men assume that the problem of advertising
a particular line of products, as, for instance, clothing,
is purely a technical one relating to the discovery of the
right sales plan, the selection of the right mediums, and
the writing of the right copy. Practically every advertising
agency will undertake the management of a consumer campaign,
no matter what the product involved, with these
considerations in mind and feel confident of the success of
the campaign, *provided the appropriation be large enough to
secure the necessary effect upon the consumer*. Naturally,
most of the thought of the advertising world is devoted to
the technical problem of securing "results," and broad
economic and ethical considerations are very largely
ignored. General economic conditions are considered only in
so far as they are essential to the development of a sales
plan which will enable the advertising to yield the maximum
in results.

The great immediate importance of making the advertising
effective, since the profits both of the manufacturers and
of the advertising agencies and mediums are dependent upon
it, has resulted in the literature of advertising devoting
only the scantiest attention to the question of whether
national advertising was a good thing for others than the
fortunate advertisers whose campaigns proved successful.

Since profits were only to be made in making advertising
effective, in making national advertising "pay" the
advertisers, it was taken for granted that the development
of national advertising represented not merely a profitable
line of endeavor for those immediately involved, but also a
progressive development in our economic life.

It is high time that serious consideration be given to those
questions which the proponents of national advertising have
almost entirely ignored.

Here is a powerful economic force of the full incidence of
which the average business man is only dimly aware, which
today profoundly influences our methods of producing and
distributing merchandise.

The average business man, absorbed by the daily task of
attending to an infinite number of details connected with
his business, has neither the time nor the aptitude to
exhaustively study economic tendencies. Yet the future of
his business, and, in a crisis, his solvency, may depend
upon whether he had adopted a policy that makes him the
beneficiary of the economic opportunities of his times, or
the victim of forces which he alone is powerless to control.

Can merchants be made to realize that both the future of
their business and their self-respect in many cases are
involved in the question of whether they are to become mere
distributors of nationally advertised merchandise, or
whether they are to remain merchants buying and selling the
products their customers need?

#### The Problem

Is national advertising a good thing for others than the
manufacturers who are successful, the advertising agencies,
and the advertising mediums?

Is it a good thing for the public to buy nationally
advertised merchandise in preference to merchandise which is
not thus advertised?

Is it a good thing for retailers to sell nationally
advertised goods?

Is it a good thing for wholesalers to distribute nationally
advertised products?

Is it a good thing for the various industries that some of
the manufacturers in the industry are national advertisers?

What has been the effect upon business of the growth of
national advertising?

What would be the effect upon business if national
advertising were to be universally applied in all industries
and by all manufacturers?

Finally, what would be the effect upon business if national
advertising as it exists today were to be largely abandoned?

It is in the hope that some light can be thrown upon these
matters that this book is written.

# II. Prosperity and Buying-Power

If the questions asked in the preceding chapter are to be
answered with some regard to logic, it is necessary for us
to spend a little time upon some of those basic economic
propositions which most business men take quite for granted.

What makes such a, perhaps, tedious method of getting to an
answer necessary, is the fact that in ninety-nine out of
every hundred discussions of the subject, the advocates of
national advertising assume that *if the methods of
transacting business before national advertising was
introduced are compared with the methods in use today, the
fact that improvements have followed the introduction of
advertising proves conclusively that the national
advertising was the cause of the improvements.* Because our
present progress in business has come after the introduction
of national advertising it does not necessarily follow that
it was the consequence of the national advertising.

"Post hoc, ergo propter hoc" is bad logic when
little care is taken to be sure of the correct relationship
of what is claimed to be cause and effect.

To be sure of the correct relationship of national
advertising to modern business conditions it is therefore
necessary to first examine such matters as our general
interest in prosperity, the operation of the competitive
system, the factory system of production, the classic system
of distribution, and finally, the present chaotic and costly
methods of distributing merchandise.

What we call prosperity is a condition so complex that a
definition that would cover all aspects of it would be too
broad for purposes of argument. If for the sake of clearness
in thinking we limit the word to one phrase of its general
meaning, *prosperity may be defined as a condition of trade
in which the buying-power of the consumers is sufficient to
absorb the productive capacity of producers at a profit*.

It is well worth while considering this question of
prosperity carefully for unless it be conceded that it is to
the best interest of business that prosperity as a whole
prevail, rather than an exceptional "prosperity" among
successful national advertisers, the whole structure of this
argument falls to the ground.

#### Limitations of Buying Power

What I have called buying-power in the foregoing definition
of prosperity is dependent upon the earnings of the
consumers of the nation.

In using the word earnings I am not confining the term
merely to wages and salaries. A merchant's profits from his
business are just as truly his earnings as the salary which
he may regularly draw. It is out of both salary and profits
that he spends for consumption. If he maintains the capital
invested in his business intact, he does not, of course,
spend for consumption in excess of his salary and profits.

A farmer may not draw a cent in the form of wages or salary.
What he has left over after he sells his crops and has paid
all his expenses, represents his earnings and it is from his
earnings only that he can safely spend for personal con-
sumption.

In the jargon of political economists, I am applying the
word earnings to what they classify as wages when earned by
labor, as interest when earned by capital, as rent when
earned by land, and as profit when earned by business
management and enterprise.

*The consumer's busing-power is limited by his earning
ability and the strength of his savings instinct.*

He may develop, or have stirred in him, new
wants, strong enough to make him work harder in order to
earn more, but he cannot at any given time honestly spend
more than he earns, no matter how complicated his desires
may become.

What he desires to save, what he invests and thus adds to
the capital of the commonwealth, sets a first limit upon
what the consumer contributes to the total buying-power of
the community.

What he earns sets a final limit on his contribution to
buying-power.

The strength of the consumer's savings instinct, it is
obvious, determines his willingness to spend. But the
strength of this instinct is, so to speak, in inverse
proportions to the strength of his desire to consume. Here
he is vulnerable to the attack of the national advertiser.

No expenditure on the part of national advertisers in
creating in him new wants can increase the amount of his
earnings of any given time. He cannot lift himself up by his
boot-straps.

But his "will to save" is elastic. The national
advertisers can, if only their advertising be persuasive
enough, induce him to wipe out his "savings" margin.

To the extent to which the savings instinct is wiped out,
buying-power is temporarily increased.

But no good or wise citizen will urge that prosperity be
increased temporarily by wiping out the
public's instinct to accumulate savings. A hectic prosperity
might, indeed, be created by urging every consumer to
transfer their savings and investments into consumption
purchases, but it would be short lived indeed.

#### Unemployment and Buying-Power

If it be conceded that it is the best interest of business
not to wipe out the savings margin of consumers, then it is
obvious that good times or bad times are caused by the
fluctuations in the earnings of the consumers of the country
and cannot be effected by "high pressure" attacks upon
saving.

When, for any reason, a considerable part of the consumers
of the nation are without earnings, the buying-power of the
community is destroyed to the extent to which they are
without earnings.

Earnings may be withheld or limited in any one, or any
combination of three general ways: by unemployment; by
underpayment, either of labor or of capital, and by business
losses.

It is axiomatic that whenever the earnings of any group of
consumers disappear as a result of unemployment, their
contribution to buyingpower vanishes from the market.

Unemployment, whether caused by strikes, by

20

VEESUS PROSPERITY

fires, by business failures, is always bad for business.

Given a condition of severe unemployment and prosperity is
replaced by hard times.

UNDERPAYMENT AND BUYING-POWER

Unemployment, however, has a further disadvantage in that it
is generally followed by the underpayment of labor.
Unemployment creates a surplus of job-seekers. Those who
are, em;ployed during such a period are apt to be under-
paid because of the willingness of those out of work to take
their places for lower wages. While some individual
employers of labor, and sometimes certain industries, may
profit by such a state of the labor market, the effect upon
business as a whole is bad, since those who receive a mere
wage of subsistence can contribute very little to the
buying-power of the market.

Naturally the manufacturers who cater to the demands of
communities of consumers who are underpaid find business
dull. The retailers through whom they sell their products to
these consumers, reduce their buying until such a time as
wages increase and the buying-power in their communities is
restored.

It is not quite so obvious that the underpayment of capital,
that the underpayment of those whose

21

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

earnings are not necessarily in the form of wages or
salaries, has an almost equally injurious effect upon
buying-power as has the underpayment of labor.

If the farmers of the nation, for instance, are underpaid,
as they are at the present time, that obviously restricts
their contribution to buyingpower. To the extent to which
they are underpaid the manufacturers, who produce goods
which farmers need or desire, fail in selling their
products.

The earnings of the farming community is dependent on the
prices obtained for its products. Underpayment is therefore
shown by the figures of the Department of Agriculture giving
the average prices received by producers of farm products on
November 1, 1922 in comparison with those of the same date
in the ten previous years. The prices are the average of
these in reports of county crop reporters " weighted
according to the relative importance of county and State."
Fifteen leading products are included in the list. During
the war period, everything showed an abnormal advance, as
was to be expected. The shrinkage since has, however, not
brought prices back to the pre-war ones.

Commodity: 1922 19 IS Increase Decrease

Wheat, bushel \$0.978 \$0.77 \$0.208

Corn, bushel 0.629 0.707 .... \$0.078

22

VERSUS PROSPERITY

Commodity 1922

Oats, bushel 0.382

Barley, bushel 0.516

Rye, bushel 0.672

Buckwheat, bushel 0.803

Potatoes, bushel 0.628

Sweet potatoes, bushel ... 0.807

Flaxseed, bushel 2.107

Apples, bushel 0.985

Hay, ton 10.96

Cotton, pound 0.224

Butter, pound 0.385

Eggs, dozen 0.376

Chickens, pound 0.185

1913

Increase

0.379

0.003

0.547

....

0.632

0.04

0.755

0.048

0.696

....

0.757

0.05

1.187

0.92

0.90

0.085

11.51

....

0.13

0.094

0.282

0.103

0.274

0.102

0.121

0.064

Decrease

0.031

0.068

0.55

Decreases in prices are shown in four of the fifteen
commodities listed. But one of these is corn, which is chief
among cereals, and another is potatoes, which is the leader
among vegetables. Aside from these actual decreases,
however, what increases in price are shown are much below
the increases in the values of farm properties, of tools, of
fertilizers, of clothing, and all other articles purchased
by farmers. This is the cause of the discontent manifested
by farmers, and it accounts both for their objections to
price adrances and their inability to buy the productive
capacity of the factories that cater to their wants.

BUSINESS LOSSES AND BUYING-POWEB

That business losses, when sufficiently wide-

23

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

spread, have a disastrous effect upon prosperity is well
known.

What we call "acts of God," such as floods, fires,
epidemics, crop failures, and what might be called "acts of
mankind," such as wars, strikes, failures and bankruptcies,
destroy prosperity, not merely because they cause
unemployment, but very largely because the destruction of
capital in these catastrophies naturally reduces the con-
sumption spending of those who suffered the losses.

If a merchant suffers a business loss in a fire, he will
probably reduce the amount of money he draws from his
business for his own use until he has replaced the amount of
capital he lost. This is in its effect upon buying-power
precisely the same as if a salary earner had made an invest-
ment in a corporation which failed, and then determined to
cut down his consumption expenditures while he again saves
from his earnings to make up his loss.

With buying-power reduced, manufacturers find business
greatly reduced in volume or completely at a standstill. If
factories continue operations at full capacity, the markets
are soon glutted, and prices tend to drop below the cost of
production in many factories. The factories with low pro-
duction costs are apt to operate on part time only, while
those with high production costs must close

24

VERSUS PROSPERITY

down completely. Even a small break in prices makes it
impossible to operate a high-productioncost factory
profitably.

A condition of prosperity is of double importance to any
manufacturer whose cost of production is high because of
labor conditions in his factory, his location, or the cost
of his raw materials. So long as business is good, demand is
good and prices are apt to be sufficiently high to enable
him to operate profitably. The moment business becomes dull,
he may have to "quit," even though his low-producing-cost
competitiors continue to operate.

That prosperity is dependent upon buyingpower; that
buying-power is dependent upon consumer earnings, and that
the earnings of consumers is dependent upon the state of
unemployment, of underpayment of labor or of capital and of
business losses involving capital destruction, is now
evident. If we now give a little further consideration to
the farm situation which I used to illustrate the effect of
underpayment upon buying power, it will show that precisely
the same reduction in buying-power would develop if, instead
of the farmers' earnings being too low, the prices asked for
the goods needed were too high.

25

Ill

CONSUMER PEICES AND BUYINGPOWER

"Roughly speaking," said Theodore H. Price in an article in
the DAILY NEWS RECOKD, "it is probable that in so far as the
industrial classes are concerned, their purchasing power and
the cost of what they buy is closely equated, but this is
not true of the farmers or of the clerical workers, and it
is from one or both of these groups that we shall probably
hear the first effective protest against the rise in the
cost of living now in progress. For it the careful merchant
should be on the alert. The 'overall parade' that every one
ridiculed was the prelude to the 'buyers' strike ' that
commenced nearly three years ago and it may be that
something equally trivial will be the signal for the next
recessional of what we call prosperity."

In this pertinent paragraph, a mere observation upon passing
events, Mr. Price takes for granted the whole of an argument
which I have tried to set forth in full logical sequence.

From Mr. Price's statement one may fairly

26

VERSUS PROSPERITY

assume first, that when the earnings of any one considerable
class of consumers is fixed, a rise in the prices of goods
to consumers tends to reduce buying-power.

Secondly, that any considerable lessening of buying-power
results in a recessional of prosperity.

Thirdly, that prosperity is really dependent on the equation
of the earnings of consumers and the prices which they have
to pay for what they buy.

Does it not logically follow from this that, just as an
inequality in the earnings of the various classes of
consumers tends to destroy prosperity, any excessive
profit-taking by any particular class of producers would
have the same effect? This is the question with which we are
here concerned.

If all prices rose uniformly, as they should in the case of
inflation pure and simple, it would not make a particle of
difference in buying-power. If the farmer gets double prices
for his products, he can pay twice as much for whatever he
buys. Prices, indeed, are doubled, but the commodities are
bought and sold just as freely as before.

What causes the destruction of buying-power is the unequal
rise of prices, or to state this in another way, the
profiting of one class of sellers at the expense of all the
buyers of the community.

The difference between these two injurious ef-

27

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

f ects upon prosperity; between the injury caused by too low
earnings and the injury caused by too high prices, can be
best shown in three tables.

The first table illustrates what happens when the
contribution to buying-power by one class of consumers is
reduced by insufficient earnings:

TABLE I. TOO LOW EAKNINGS

(The figures in the table represent arbitrary percentages of
the normal earnings of the consumers, and of normal prices
by the producers. The normal figure .is 100 per cent.)

Consumer's Earnings Producer's Prices

Farmers 50 Food 100

Clerks 100 Clothing 100

Weavers 100 Drugs 100

Lawyers 100 Fuel 100

Doctors 100 Transportation 100

All other consumers .... 100 All other producers 100

550 600

It is apparent that with farmers earning 50 per cent, less
than normal, the buying-power of the consumers is only 550
per cent. The producers, those who have to sell to the
consumers, in trying to dispose of 600 per cent, of
products, soon find themselves cutting each other's prices
in an effort to get the business. The lack of demand for
their goods, and the losses caused them by an over-supply of
their products, soon shatters that delicate affair which we
call pros-

28

VERSUS PROSPERITY

perity, and business is "dull" if the disparity between
demand and supply is little, while if the disparity is
large, we may have what none of us want, "hard times."

In this second table it is apparent that precisely the same
condition develops if one group of producers is able to
secure excessive prices for its products.

TABLE II. TOO HIGH PRICES

(The figures in the table represent arbitrary percentages of
the normal earnings of the consumers, and of normal prices
by the producers. The normal figure is 100 per cent.)

Consumer's Earnings Producer's prices

Farmers 50 Food 90

Clerks 100 Clothing 90

Weavers 100 Drugs pO

Lawyers 100 Fuel 90

Doctors 100 Transportation 150

All other consumers 100 All other producers 90

550 600

With transportation securing an abnormally high price for
its product and operating on high margins for profit, isn't
it apparent that substantially the same demoralization would
develop in business as in the first case we charted? To the
extent to which the consumers were either forced or induced
to buy of the producing group which is operating on an
exorbitant margin for profit, to that extent they would
reduce their con-

29

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

sumption of the goods made by all the other producers. Not
only would the consumers buy less of all the other products,
but the makers of all the other products would find
themselves selling in a market in which the cards, so to
speak, had been " stacked " against them. Selling in such a
market, if the condition is sharp enough, would soon result
in market prices on their products at or below the cost of
production. High-production-cost factories then have to
close down, unemployment develops, and the Blue Bird of
prosperity leaves for more pleasant regions.

If we grant, for the sake of argument, the claim of the
proponents of national advertising, that national
advertisers are able to enjoy greater margins of profit than
those producers who do not advertise nationally, we get the
following:

TABLE III. EFFECT OF NATIONAL ADVERTISING

(The figures in the table represent arbitrary percentages of
the normal earnings of the consumers, and of normal prices
by the producers. The normal figure is 100 per cent.)

Consumer's Earnings Producer's Prices

Farmers 50 Advertisers of Food 150

Clerks 100 other Food p ro ducers . . 100

Weavrs 10 Advertisers of Clothing . 150

Lawyers . . 100

Doctors " " " 100 Other lClothin g Producers 100

All other 'consumers'."".' .' 100 iA11 otlier Producers ....
100

550 600

30

VERSUS PROSPERITY

The operation of the economic law which we have been trying
to trace may seem more obscure in this table than in the
previous ones, but the net result is exactly the same. The
firms who are successful national advertisers and who
operate on very large margins for profit, get the biggest
share of what the consumers can spend, while those who do
not advertise nationally have to fight for what remains of
buying-power, with all the resulting disadvantages of
intensified competition in meeting a circumscribed demand.

With such a state of affairs, and this is the state of
affairs toward which national advertisers are continually
working, not only do the nonnational advertisers operate
under a handicap, but the consumers tend to get less for
their money.

It is, of course, a question of fact whether the national
advertisers do actually take in the profits which they
cannot be said to make. That many of them do is very well
known. Why some of them fail to do so, and why in some lines
it is more difficult to get outside of competition through
national advertising, we shall consider later.

The national advertiser who takes a dollar's worth of some
cereal and puffs, shreds, or flakes it; packs it in
attractive cartons; spends fortunes in advertising it, and
then sells it to the consumer for forty-eight times the cost
of the original grain, operates on an enormous margin

31

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

for profit, but he cannot be said to "make" anything that
justifies him in the taking of that profit.

There is a difference between "taking" a profit and "making"
a profit.

A friend of mine impressed the difference upon me with a
vivid illustration. He saw a great husky footman in Central
Park exercising a couple of lap dogs which he led around at
the end of a chain. ' i That man, ' ' he thought to him-
self, "takes the \$3 a day he is paid, but he certainly
doesn't make \$3 worth of anything."

The consumer who buys nationally advertised goods may not
know that he is being influenced from thousands of
advertisements in newspapers, billboards, and magazines to
direct buying-power toward those products which enable
manufacturers to "take" excess profits and away from those
manufacturers who "make" the reasonable profits they earn,
but he nevertheless contributes with every dollar he spends
in that way his little mite toward upsetting the equation
upon which general prosperity depends.

Business, under our economic system, may continue in spite
of an enormous number of such drags upon buying-power. But
prosperity is undoubtedly subject to strain by practices
which, though unable to produce actual "hard times," may yet
render hazardous the profits of a considerable number of
businesses.

32

VERSUS PROSPERITY

Even though we overlook ethical considerations (the question
of what the consumer gets for his money), we cannot overlook
the economic question involved in the excessive margins for
profit upon which national advertisers operate.

We must determine whether the margins for profit of national
advertisers are actually produced in an economic sense, or
whether they are merely " taken" from the public either by
inducing consumers to buy at prices that are too high or by
doing virtually the same thing in withholding from the
public the benefits of lower costs of production. We must
determine whether the practices and necessities of the
national advertisers reduce the earnings of the wholesalers
and retailers who distribute their goods. We must determine
whether the growing habit of buying nationally advertised
goods does not restrict the buying-power of the consumers.

Upon the answer to these questions depends a decision as to
whether national advertising is good for business as a
whole, or whether it is good only for those manufacturers
who happen to make a success of their national advertising
campaigns.

33

IV

COMPETITION

"All business men," said Edward A. Filene, president of Wm.
Filene? s Sons Co., Boston, \* ' seek either to get out of
the way of competition, or to get above competition."

Getting above competition, Mr. Filene explained, helps the
public. If a business man gets above competition by selling
goods of the same quality at less price, or a better quality
of goods at the same price, he performs a public service.

But if a business man succeeds in getting out of the way of
competition, then he can sell the same goods at a higher
price or give a poorer quality or a smaller quantity of the
goods and yet secure the same price.

A manufacturer gets above competition only by making a
better product or making it more efficiently than his
competitors.

He gets outside of competition when he possesses some
advantage in selling which has nothing to do with his
ability as a producer. A patent, a tariff duty, a trademark
made valuable by advertising, are such advantages. The
posses-

34

VERSUS PROSPERITY

sion of such an advantage when it comes to marketing his
products enables its owner to get prices and "take" profits
for which he renders no compensating contribution to the
production of wealth.

Fixing prices under the competitive system is really a
system of regulating wages, profits, rent and interest. When
competition operates normally, it tends to distribute
earnings in accordance with what each contributes to the
production of wealth.

Of course the competitive system does not now operate and
never has operated in an absolutely normal manner. Just as
the average human eye is an "abnormal" eye, being either
better or poorer than the normal eye, so the average
purchase and sale is consummated in a market that is never
entirely competitive, but subject to all sorts of trade
restrictions and regulations. If competition were to be made
absolutely free, it would be necessary not merely to abolish
all ordinary trade restrictions, including trademarks,
licenses, patents, franchises, tariffs, but also all present
hindrances to access to natural resources. With competition
absolutely free, the basis of all transactions in the labor
markets, the money markets, the stock markets would tend to
levels that would distribute the income of society to each
factor in production ex-

35

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

actly in accordance with what each contributes to the work
of supplying the needs and desires of society.

TRAPE RESTRICTIONS AND PROSPERITY

Every restriction upon competition must be very carefully
considered by business men, not merely because the
restrictions may affect their individual businesses
diredtly, but because the restrictions may affect the
buying-power of some considerable part of the consumers upon
whom they may depend for their sales. If the trade
restrictions are far-reaching enough, they may seriously
check the condition of prosperity in which every business
man has a vital interest. Confronted with a tendency toward
smaller buying-power on the part of consumers, farsighted
business men will consider what alternatives to strive for,
and if none can be developed, to set about putting their
houses in order for the ensuing period of dull times.

Being myself a pronounced individualist, I am an advocate of
the removal of every trade restriction which cannot be
justified by important public policies. The ultimate effect
of every trade restriction is toward collectivism or
monoply. I therefore feel that any tendency to fix wages,
profits, interest, rent arbitrarily and outside the "
higgling of the market" in which supply and de-

36

VERSUS PROSPERITY

mand operate freely is a tendency that is ultimately against
the general welfare.

Whatever the evils and defects of competition, in the long
run, competition itself tends to correct them. Unless we are
to abandon our sturdy belief in every American's ability to
hold his own in a fair field, we must strive for business
practices and conditions which give full scope to the action
of fair competition.

Competition, whenever it is free, establishes prices
absolutely in accordance with the operation of the law of
supply and demand,

But it does much more than this.

COMPETITION AS A DISTRIBUTOR OP PROGRESS

The past century has been marked by a prodigious increase in
our wealth-producing power. The utilization of steam and
electricity, the introduction of improved process and
automatic machinery, the minute sub-division of labor, the
grander scale of production, the wonderful improvements in
methods of transportation, have reduced the cost of
producing most commodities to fractional parts of their cost
when hand-made.

Competition tends to give to the public the benefit of every
improvement in the process of production and distribution.

If a manufacturer develops a superior method of production
(it may be by using automatic

37

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

machinery or by more efficiently employing Ms labor), he can
greatly increase his business by sharing his lower
production costs with his customers. He makes additional
sales, because he can quote lower prices and give better
values.

But as soon as his competitors develop similar methods of
reducing their costs, they meet the prices of the original
manufacturer. There is then a general lowering of the price
level of the merchandise which they happen to make.

What is true of manufacturing costs, is also true of selling
costs. Competition tends to give the consumer the benefit of
any reduction in the cost of selling.

The normal tendency of competition is to lower the price of
all commodities just as rapidly as new inventions and new
methods of transacting business are developed.

When, for some reason, the price upon any product has not
been lowered after there have been great improvements in
making it, then some anomalous element has plainly entered
into the fixing of the price.

Does national advertising enable the owner of a trademarked
or branded article to get out of the way of competition,
and, so to speak, defy the ordinary operation of the law of
supply and demand in fixing prices?

However sincerely the advocates of national

38

VERSUS PROSPERITY

advertising may assert that the object of their advertising
is solely to increase sales, it is nevertheless an
inescapable consequence of their advertising (if it proves
successful), that the national advertiser acquires the power
to ignore the true market value of his branded product and
to price it at all that the traffic will bear.

This is an economic interpretation of what Mr.  Filene meant
when he spoke of getting " outside of competition. "

THE SHIFT FROM " COMPETITION IN VALUES " TO "COMPETITION IN
NATIONAL ADVERTISING"

"Advertising whets the edge of competition," said Clarkson
A. Collins, Jr., of the Collins Armstrong Co., of New York,
in PRINTERS' INK. "The manufacturer who becomes an
advertiser, enters, in effect, into a great debate. His
opponents are his competitive advertisers. His audience and
his judges are the people. He will win or lose primarily on
the strength and clarity of his argument, not on the virtues
of his proposition. To win decisively he must not only
present conclusions, but also the facts from which these
conclusions are drawn. He must deliver a stronger, more
convincing argument than his opponents."

The words in italics in this quotation are mine. This
particular statement is an illuminating commentary upon the
claim that competition between

39

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

the nationally advertised articles themselves would offset
the effects of each nationally advertised article having
been raised outside of ordinary competition.

Even though it be granted, say the proponents of national
advertising, that national advertising enables the
manufacturer to take advantage of the demand created for his
trademarked article and to secure a better price for it than
competitors of his who manufacture similar articles, the
fact that he has to meet the competition of other national
advertisers in the same line prevents him from securing an
excessive price for his product.

This would be true if the competition between the national
advertisers was really a competition having to do with the
relative value of the products they actually make. But as
Mr. Collins pointed out, a national advertiser really
competes with other national advertisers "primarily on the
strength and clarity of his argument, not on the virtues of
his proposition."

Competition between two manufacturers, neither of whom makes
a systematic attempt to warp the judgment of consumers by
taking advantage of their psychological weaknesses, re-
sults in the bulk of the business going to the man-
ufacturer who is able to give the better value.

Competition between two manufacturers, both of whom wage the
battle for business as a mat-

40

VERSUS PROSPERITY

ter of influencing the consumer psychologically results in
the bulk of the business going to the one ivho is the better
advertiser.

In the case of the non-advertising manufacturer, his ability
to manufacture efficiently is his most powerful selling aid.

In the case of the national advertiser, his good judgment in
selecting his advertising manager and advertising agency his
ability to advertise efficiently is his most powerful
selling aid.

Is there any question as to where the public "gets off" when
business shifts from the basis of competition in values to
the basis of competition in national advertising?

LOSING SIGHT OF THE GOODS

"Does the buyer of the advertised article get his money's
worth?" asks H. W. Barnes, advertising manager of the
Russell-Miller Milling Co., of Minneapolis, in PRINTEKS'
INK. "I prefer to rephrase the subject and say, 'The buyer
of a wisely advertised article gets more for his money than
the buyer of an unadvertised article The properly advertised
article possesses more value than the same article
unadvertised or poorly advertised. That is, the advertising
invests in the article qualities which add to the
satisfaction, and the pleasure and pride of the buyer. Ad-
vertising clothes the article with esthetic qualities

41

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

so effectually that the actual wood, iron, gold, wool,
cotton, or other material is lost sight of in contemplation
of the ' condition' that may be brought about through
possession of the commodity. And on this account the
advertised article is a \* better buy' than the unadvertised
one. The one may fill an important place in your plan of
things, contribute its share in your happiness and profit ;
the other is simply so much inanimate material. ' '

Mr. Barnes assumes that were the same article to be compared
before and after it had been "properly" advertised, the mere
fact that it had been advertised would have made it more
valuable to the customer. By succeeding in persuading
purchasers through advertising to attach subjectively a
greater value to it, the article itself had become more
valuable !

That advertising can and does do this is true. But should
the public permit itself to lose sight of the objective
reality of what it buys? Is it a good thing that the public
should be led to ignore the actual wood, iron, gold, wool,
cotton, or material it buys while contemplating the esthetic
merits with which a clever adwriter had endowed the
merchandise?

A cake of soap remains after all only a cake of soap. No
amount of packing, tinting, or perfuming can make a cake of
soap a work of art,

42

VERSUS PROSPERITY

which the public should buy and pay for as art.

But persuade women that a particular kind of soap contains
the same ingredients which Cleopatra used to add to her
charms, and they will lose sight of the fact that it is soap
which they are buying, and pay any price that may be asked
for it with their minds busy "in contemplation of the '
condition ' that may be brought about through possession of
the commodity."

If what Mr. Barnes says is true, that the advertising of the
soap invests the soap with a greater value, does it not
logically follow that the more advertising there is put into
the soap, the greater is the value with which it is
invested? Does it not follow that by inverting the relative
importance of the actual qualities of the article in favor
of the esthetic addition made by the advertising, that
competition between two adververtising manufacturers each of
whom sought to out-advertise the other would result in both
articles taking on greater and greater value?

Once a manufacturer embarks upon national advertising he
begins to add to the value of his goods not by making a
better article, but by spending a greater sum upon selling
the article he is already making.

He competes with other manufacturers in a race to see who
can spend the most for advertising.

If he succeeds as a national advertiser, the

43

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

temptation to increase his advertising appropriation year by
year is irresistible. Each year he lifts his product farther
and farther outside of the competition of articles similar
to his which sell purely upon their merits as merchandise.
And year by year he contributes his share to raising the
price level of all the articles in his line. What he manages
to gain by reducing his production cost by manufacturing on
a larger scale, he loses by the increase in his expenditure
for advertising.

But so long as he can maintain the consumer demand for his
trade mark, or induce the distributors to believe that he
has established such a demand, he is individually better off
not merely because of the better prices which he can induce
the ultimate consumer to pay for his trademarked article but
because of his ability to increase his margin for profit
\~by reducing that of the wholesalers and retailers through
whom he distributes.

PRICE COMPETITION, QUALITY COMPETITION, AND VALUE
COMPETITION

Certain expressions used in this chapter might well be more
clearly defined at this time.

The expressions " price competition," and "quality
competition," have a fairly indefinite meaning to most
business men.

44

VEKSUS PROSPEBITY

Charles T. Johnson, president of the Dover Manufacturing
Co., of Canal Dover, O., in the course of a statement before
a committee of Congress expressed this meaning very clearly.
"Beginning in the seventies with the advent of the
department store and catalog house and ending with the
nineties, we had, in this country, what might be termed a \*
price market. ' That is, quality was sacrificed to price,
and the cry of the retailer as well as the jobber was for
something cheap, cheaper, cheapest, and it was a hard matter
to get a good article, even though you were willing to pay
for it, as the retailers did not dare to carry them for fear
they would be called 'high priced.' Beginning in the
nineties, there developed what might be called a ' quality
market/ and this has made rapid strides. In fact, the major
portion of the consuming public now demand quality and does
not haggle on price."

Price competition in so far as it relates to manufacturers
is the competitive effort to make the cheapest possible
article so as to be able to sell it at the lowest possible
price.

Quality competition is almost the exact opposite of price
competition. In so far as it relates to manufacturers,
quality competition is the competitive effort to secure the
highest possible price by improving the quality of the
article.

The word "price" is used in the one term so

45

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

as to make price synonymous with poorness in quality. The
word ' ' quality ' ' is used in the other term so as to make
it a synonym of high quality.

As a matter of fact, the poorest grade of any article has
"quality," and the highest grade has a "price."

The policy of "trading up," with which national advertising
naturally seeks to indentify itself, is frequently used to
create confusion in the minds of buyers about the fact that
price and quality are strictly relative.

The only sound basis for buying and for judging the merits
of various offerings of the same kind of merchandise is by
the comparison of the values offered.

Value represents the relationship of price to quality.

For the purpose of making this clear, let us assume that
there are on the market two grades of a certain product;
that certain makers of the product make the "A" or higher
grade, and the other the "B" or lower grade. It is, of
course, impossible to compare the values offered by all the
makers of the article by comparing the qualities alone, or
the prices alone.

If a certain "A" grade article has 200 points of merit, and
sells for \$2, and a certain "B" grade article has 100
points of merit and sells for \$1, then the values offered
by these two makers are

46

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the same. Each article is fully worth what the consumer is
asked to pay for it.

But if a certain "A" grade article has only 110 points of
merit and sells for \$2, while the "B" grade article has 100
points of merit and sells for \$1, then the "B" grade is the
better value.

A business force such as national advertising which leads
the public and the merchants who sell to the public to
believe that in that instance the "A" grade is a " better
buy" merely because it is represented as the "quality"
product is a menace to sound business. In nearly every case,
national advertising is used to create a public impression
that the advertised "A" grade is worth twice as much as the
non-advertised "B" grade when as a matter of fact it is not
twice as good.

VALUE COMPETITION

Under conditions of free competition, business is a rivalry
in value giving, irrespective of whether the tendency of the
times is toward a price market or toward a quality market.
The enterprising manufacturer under normal competitive
conditions seeks to get "above" the competition of his
rivals by manufacturing so efficiently that he can offer the
best values in the particular grades of goods which he
makes.

Value competition may be defined in so far as

47

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

it relates to manufacturers as the competitive effort to
secure business by offering high values in each grade of
goods made.

It is possible both in a price market and in a quality
market to offer poor values. Neither price alone, nor
quality alone, are a sufficient measure of the relative
desirability of merchandise. Competition in value giving is
the only kind of competition upon which business can be
conducted in that sound and enduring fashion that results
when both buyer and seller receive a "square deal."

Do nationally advertised goods represent better values than
goods which are not nationally advertised? Can this question
be answered in any way without discussing specific articles?
Is it necessary to make "odious comparisons ' ' of qualities
and prices to determine whether the price of the nationally
advertised articles are relatively too high?

Since the proponents of national advertising find it
necessary to maintain that the superiority of nationally
advertised articles does not of necessity have anything to
do with intrinsic qualities, isn't it possible that many of
them do not represent better values? When it is necessary in
order to prove the superiority of the advertised article to
claim advantages which put in no appearance in a laboratory
test of the merchandise itself,

48

VERSUS PROSPERITY

there is good ground for suspecting that national
advertising may actually reduce the value which a
manufacturer can give.

The mere fact that when a manufacturer shifts from competing
with other manufacturers in values, to competing with those
who are nationally advertising, the shift is followed by a
great deal of talk about quality, doesn't lessen the
possibility that the public may be getting less in value
than before the national advertising entered into' the
situation.

It doesn't get the same value in an advertised article if it
pays a higher price for the same quality; nor if it pays the
same price as before, while the cost of making the article
has been reduced; nor if it pays an excessive price for a
slight change or improvement in the article itself.

MAKING A SALABLE ARTICLE ADVERTISABLE

Artificially created improvements and sometimes sheer
fictions are sufficient to make an article, otherwise the
same in quality as before, "advertisable." And once an
article can be successfully advertised, once the demand for
the article can be established through advertising, the
question of value is lost sight of both by the public and
the distributors.

In a suggestive discussion of how merchandise that is merely
salable may be made advertisable,

49

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

W. P. Werheim, advertising manager of Pratt & Lambert,
Buffalo, N. Y., said: " If the article itself has no
exceptionally prominent qualities or values, a scheme
frequently can be evolved to make an advertising point of
advantage. ... In these days of modern advertising, we may
almost set it down as a general rule that the ordinary known
qualities of a product are not sufficient to make it an
advertising success. The qualities must be enlarged upon,
developed or added to in some unique manner to secure the
greatest efficiency of the advertising. I do not mean by
this that it pays to do dishonest advertising, but that the
advertiser should take advantage of every legitimate means
to emphasize the qualities of his product, and thus actually
add value to it."

I do not think that there is any question about the fact
that if a manufacturer can "put over" a successful national
advertising campaign that he can sell his product in spite
of the fact that he may give less in value. As to whether
national advertisers actually do give poorer values (with
the advertising created values ignored), that is something
concerning which any man can satisfy himself if he will do
as I have often done go into the stores and compare the
values offered on mere merchandise with the values offered
on the advertised brands.

The experiment is always illuminating.

50

PEODUCTION, DISTEIBUTION, AND CONSUMPTION

W. W. Stewart, president of the National Merchant Tailors'
Association of America, was recently quoted as follows: "
Never in the history of the country has the custom made
clothing business been on so secure a basis as at the
present time. The public is awakening to the value of the
custom made garment as opposed to the machine made. From
every section of the United States we learn through the
association of the increased business of the custom tailor
and the return of customers to us who have tried the ready
made product."

Today, when the successful management of a factory demands
an executive who is no longer a mere manufacturer, but a
combination of manufacturer, financier, salesman and
advertising man, it is easy to lose sight of a tremendously
important fact, that the future of the factory system of
production is dependent upon the factory-made product
reaching the consumer at a lower price than

51

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

the consumer can make it himself, or have it made by a
craftsman for him.

If there were good reasons for believing that the factory
system of production would drive craft production out of
existence at the time it was first introduced early in the
19th century, doesn't it seem reasonable to believe that
with the infinitely more efficient methods of production in
modern factories it ought to be absolutely impossible for
anybody to compete with the factories?

It would surely seem so, and yet we find that craft
production is experiencing a revival the products of the
hand loom, the hand forge, and the custom maker are being
more and more featured in the press.

In the days of cottage industry and village workshop and the
neighborhood sale of product, making was the prime factor in
cost, and selling a mere incident.

With the advent of the factories, in the early days of what
economists refer to as the industrial revolution, the hand
workers were literally starved out of business. The factory
made products were sold at fractional parts of prices that
formerly prevailed for similar merchandise.

The system of the division of labor, the system of using
machinery to lessen the labor needed in making, and of
applying steam and electricity as

52

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the motive power, led to the conquest by the factories of
the making of one commodity after another.

But with the development of the factory system, there was a
corresponding development in the system of distribution. So
long as production was limited to the quantities which an
individual craftsman could turn out with the aid of journey
man workers and apprentices, the production of any one shop
was too small to require any complex system for distributing
the products. In most cases, the products were sold direct
to consumers living in the neighborhood of the maker's shop.

But with the multiplication of production which came with
the rise of the factories, the system of distribution
through various middlemen followed as inevitably as day
follows night. The jobber came into his own rapidly,
relieving the retailers of the problem of buying from a
myriad of factories, and completely relieving the factories
of their selling problem. The jobber made it possible for
the retailer to buy in small quantities and for the factory
to sell in large quantities.

THE ADVERTISING MANUFACTURER

So long as distribution was effected through these channels
the factory owner was primarily

53

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

a production manager, and his success or failure in business
depended almost entirely upon his ability to produce
efficiently.

This is not true of the manufacturer who is a national
advertiser. The advertising manufacturer looks upon
production problems as matters of routine. His principal
concern is with the advertising and selling of his product,
both for the purpose of increasing sales and for the purpose
of enlarging the margin for profit on his product. As a
result, products are designed and packed so as to enhance
their " advertisability, " and good-will created by
advertising is a bigger asset of many of these factories
than machinery and buildings. Naturally their products are
sold at prices which yield dividends both upon the good-will
and the plant investment.

Isn't -there something significant, something which every
manufacturer might find worth careful consideration, in two
large advertisements which appeared side by side in a recent
issue of the NEW YORK TIMES? One was an advertisement of a
clothier selling a line of high grade nationally advertised
clothing, which featured suits ranging from \$50 up.
Alongside of it was an advertisement of a custom tailor
offering suits from \$40 up.

At one time, it was believed that the clothing

54

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

factories would drive the custom tailors out of existence.

But the tailors, like so many of the survivors of the old
system of production, seem to be "coming back."

Those interested in the future prosperity of the factory
system of production should never for a moment forget that
in many industries the greatest competitor of a factory is
not necessarily the other factories making the same product.

It is the ultimate consumer who is potentially the biggest
producer of all, and in many lines the consumer is still the
biggest of the factory's competitors.

The biggest competitor of the baking industry is the
housewife who bakes her own bread.

The biggest competitor of the needle trades is the woman who
does her own sewing.

The biggest danger to the factory system is the fact that
when prices asked of the consumer on factory made products
become high enough, a market is immediately created for
machinery and supplies which enable the consumer to produce
for himself.

Whenever it becomes stylish to do your cooking and sewing in
the home, business will become very dull in several
industries.

It was stylish to be an efficient homemaker at

55

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

one time. There are signs that society is slowly but surely
turning from the leadership of the spender to the leadership
of the homemaker.

Manufacturers will do well to consider the effect of the
prices they ask for their products upon the consumer who
wields knitting needles, uses a sewing machine for
dressmaking, a steam pressure cooker for canning, learns all
the new methods of making things in the home, and is ready
to buy a myriad of mechanical devices which will enable her
to "roll her own."

PRODUCTION COSTS AND DISTRIBUTION COSTS

During the past fifty years, a period of time which roughly
corresponds with the present era of national advertising,
there has been a notable decline in the basic cost of
producing most commodities. The development of motive power,
the invention of automatic machinery, and the prog- ress in
industrial processes, have all helped to reduce the cost of
making all kinds of products.

The whole world has been explored for the purpose of
securing ample and inexpensive supplies of raw materials.
Reductions in the cost of raw materials are primarily
responsible for the many luxuries of by-gone ages which have
become necessaries of modern living.

Manufacturing, transportation and administrative methods
have been so perfected during

56

VERSUS PROSPERITY

this period that the efficiency of our present machinery for
producing all manner of commodities compares with the
methods of fifty years ago as the automobile truck compares
with the ox-cart.

Why is it, then, that the prices which consumers pay for
products have not dropped in proportion to the lower costs
of production?

With competition substantially free, the public should have
automatically received the benefit of the improvements in
the methods of production, either in the form of lower
prices for the same quality of merchandise, or better
merchandise at the same price.

The public has in some lines entirely failed to secure this
benefit, and in others, secured it only in part.
Significantly, it has reaped the benefit of improved methods
of production mostly on commodities which have been least
effected by national advertising.

Naturally with the capacity of consumers to absorb
production being reduced in this way, the efforts of
manufacturers to dispose of their constantly increasing
productive capacities has year by year intensified. There
being less and less buying-power to absorb the production,
the rivalry to supply what buying-power there may be in the
market has became intense to a degree unknown fifty years
ago.

57

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

The very conditions which intensify the necessity of
manufacturers to sell, lead them to ever increased
expenditures for distribution and selling.

58

VI

NATIONAL ADVERTISING AND DISTRIBUTION

Out of every dollar which the consumer pays for the purchase
of any article, one part is paid for the actual making of
the article itself, and one part for its distribution so
that he may buy it when and where he may desire.

The Joint Congressional Committee of Agricultural Inquiry
was rather shocked, judging from the tone of its .voluminous
report on this subject, when it learned that most of the
consumer's dollar is paid for distribution.

According to Paul E. Derrick's book, "How to Reduce Selling
Costs," distribution absorbs from one-half to three-fifths
of what the consumer pays.

According to an investigation of costs of production and
distribution made by Walter Sammons and reported in his book
"Keeping Up With Rising Costs," the cost of production
including the manufacturers' profit (in forty typical
factories producing all kinds of merchandise),

59

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

represented only 41 per cent, of the price which the
consumer paid.

In a recent address, Eoger W. Babson said: "We have applied
all that science and human ingenuity have contributed to
production but we have let distribution look out for itself.
The result is that our manufacturing cost has been cut to a
fraction of what it was fifty years ago, but the percentage
cost of distribution is more than it was fifty years ago."

Is there anything surprising in the fact that the general
question of distribution has been permitted to shift for
himself? Is there any sufficiently strong business interest
that is concerned with reducing distribution costs?

It is to the interest of every individual manufacturer to
cut production costs; to install new machinery and employ
new processes which might enable him to make his product at
lower prices than his competitors or at least as low as his
most efficient rivals. Low production costs enable him to
add to the profits of his business either by increasing his
margin for profit, or, by enabling him to sell at lower
prices than some of his competitors, to add to his profits
by increasing the volume of his sales.

But as to general distribution costs, the average
manufacturer is only indirectly concerned.

Instead of its being to the direct interest of any

60

VERSUS PROSPERITY

considerable group of individual businesses to reduce
distribution costs, it is today to the interest of the
advertising industry, one of the most ably managed of all
businesses, to increase them.

Only the ultimate consumers are directly interested in
reducing distribution costs. And they are now, thanks to the
accomplishments of advertising psychologists, like so much
clay in the hands of those who have mastered the art of
moulding their desires.

But while it is true that only the ultimate consumer is
directly interested indirectly it concerns all business.

Every widespread abnormality in the margins for profit upon
which goods are sold is a menace to prosperity.

The future of the factory system of production is involved
in the question of whether increases in distribution costs
outstrip the manufacturer's ability to reduce production
costs.

If we are to progress soundly, with the fewest possible
disturbances to normal business conditions, distribution
just like production costs should become lower year by year.

The first target, at which the superficial critic who
becomes familiar with this condition aims his
recommendations, is the " middleman."

Since every retailer, jobber, commission merchant, and
broker is in business to secure for hina-

61

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

self as large a share of the dollar which the consumer
spends as is possible, it is easy to assume that it is the
middleman who is responsible for putting height into the
high cost of distribution.

But competition among themselves, between retailer and
retailer, between wholesaler and wholesaler, renders the
middleman powerless to increase any distribution cost
arbitrarily. To a great extent they are passive factors with
regard to the creation of additional distribution ex-
penses. The prices at which they sell include a margin for
their own profit which is usually only a little more than
the cost of doing business in their line. Department stores,
mail order houses and chain store systems have it is true,
introduced far-reaching merchandising inovations, but the
extent to which these can be charged for and added to the
price which the customer pays is limited by the competition
of the smaller middleman.

Distributors as a class have no direct interest in trying to
reduce the cost of distribution, because, naturally enough,
they are interested in such a matter as the relationship of
production costs to distribution costs only in so far as it
affects their personal fortunes.

Talk about reducing the cost of doing business, and every
business man is very much interested.

Talk about reducing the cost of distribution, and the
inarticulate public, instead of showing a

62

VERSUS PROSPERITY

business interest in the matter, is apt to look to
politicians for help.

Roger W. Babson, in the statement previously quoted, calls
attention to the fact that the percentage cost of
distribution has been steadily rising; that it is
considerably higher today than it was fifty years ago. It is
a matter of general knowledge that this is so.

We must seek for the cause in some of the methods of present
day distribution which were not employed fifty years ago.

The conclusion of most of the serious attempts to locate the
causes of the rise in distribution costs may be classified
under two heads either as relating to the efficiency of the
distributors, or as relating to the cost of various kinds of
" service " which the public of today has come to demand.

To these two factors, I now propose to add, a third factor:
the introduction and great increase in the volume of
national advertising.

ARE DISTRIBUTORS INEFFICENT?

I think that most of what has been written and said
concerning the inefficiency of the distributors of the
country is based upon fallacious reasoning.

The distributor of today is, if compared to the distributor
of fifty years ago, immeasureably more efficient. Not only
are his personnel and his

63

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

methods of doing business much more efficient, but the whole
physical mechanism which he uses in selling and handling
merchandise reflects all that the times have had to offer in
the way of improvement.

That there is still plenty of room for improvement, is very
true.

But in spite of this, that distributors as a whole have kept
pace, in general efficiency, with most groups in the
business world, is beyond the possibility of dispute.

Surely it is not necessary to marshal evidence to prove
this. One has only to visualize the retail store of fifty
years ago, and the retail store today, to see that it is
true. One has only to recall methods of fifty years ago in
shipping, billing and accounting to visualize the
deliberation with which wholesalers then operated, and the
rapidity and dispatch with which they conduct their
operations today.

If those who criticize the distributors of today were to
compare them with the distributors of yesterday (instead of
comparing the present day distributors with some wholely
ideal distributors), they would very quickly come to the
conclusion that distributors have progressed just as much as
have the manufacturers, the railroads, or any other class of
businesses.

Exclude the high cost of rendering service in

64

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the way of deliveries, returns and shopping comforts, which
were not given by the merchants of fifty years ago, and I
believe the average distributor's cost of doing business
today is not much more than it was at that time.

As to the high cost of serving the present critical public,
the situation is different.

The demand for fancy service has undoubtedly added to the
cost of distribution.

The public now demands a much wider range of merchandise
from which to choose. It picks and chooses among dozens of
brands which are, but for the differences in name,
practically identical. It demands a delivery service that
is, in the case of large stores, free for a hundred miles or
more from the store, and that is in the case of neighborhood
stores, literally at the beck and call of the housewife's
whims. It demands that small stores be accessible regardless
of how this may multiply the number of stores, and it de-
mands luxuries of convenience in the large stores regardless
of how this may add to their cost of doing business.

For all this the public pays. It pays for it by an increase
in the proportionate part of what is paid for distribution
out of every dollar which it spends.

I am not arguing that this should not be so. I am merely
pointing out the fact that the demand

65

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

of the public for better service from the distributors of
merchandise a demand which it is true is largely created by
the rivalry of the merchants themselves is a large factor in
causing the rise of the cost of distribution. There is no
novelty, of course, in my pointing out that this is so. It
has been generally recognized as one of those steps in our
progress as a people which have added to the comforts and
pleasures of life. Provided it is kept within reasonable
bounds in pace with the increase in the earning power of
consumers it is certainly something for which the public
will not hesitate to pay.

THE EISE OF NATIONAL ADVERTISING

There remains now to be considered what part the development
of national advertising has played in upsetting the former
ratio of production to distribution costs.

Fifty years ago, national advertising can hardly be said to
have been in existence.

Advertising, of course, is of ancient lineage. But the
particular kind of advertising to which I have applied the
term national advertising is a development of comparatively
recent times.

By national advertising, or consumer advertising (which is a
synonymous term), I mean any kind of advertising by a
manufacturer, without regard to the kind of medium he may
use,

66

VERSUS PROSPERITY

which is addressed to ultimate consumers for the purpose of
creating a consumer demand sufficient to force, or at least
assist, in inducing retailers to stock the manufacturer's
product.

This kind of advertising is not merely a development of the
past fifty years; it is, something created by business
institutions which are themselves creations of the same
period of time. It has been largely created, systematized,
and sustained by the advertising agencies and the national
magazines.

Originally advertising agencies were space brokers who
bought and sold space in lists of newspapers and magazines.
So long as the agencies remained space brokers, pure and
simple, and advertisers shopped from one to another to buy
space as cheaply as possible, they could not serve nor could
they secure the confidence of manufacturers. Their gradual
metamorphosis into semi-professional agents of the
advertiser (though still receiving their pay from the
publishers for whom they are supposed to and do "create"
business), enabled them slowly but surely to command the
respect of the most conservative of business men.

Once they were considered semi-respectable. The character of
advertising at that time tended to this suspicion. Before
national advertising could come into its own, the impression
that ad-

67

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

vertising was something which could be used only by patent
medicine vendors and the cheapest types of businesses had to
be removed.

This change in the character of advertising was the work of
the national magazines, which eliminated such advertising
from their columns so as to make them attractive to
responsible manufacturers. National advertising as we know
it today is in large part the consequence of this change.

THE INFLUENCE OF THE NATIONAL MAGAZINES

But not only did advertising agencies and advertising men
have to evolve from their original environment. So long as
there were no dominating national magazines, the work of
systematically creating national advertisers lacked vigorous
propagandists. The magazines could afford to finance this
propaganda and to employ the ablest men they could find for
such work because their entire success as business
propositions required the conversion of manufacturers to
national advertising.

During this period the newspapers did practically nothing to
create national advertising. The newspapers fifty years ago
looked for support to their political "angels." While the
magazines were developing national advertising, the
newspapers were freeing themselves from almost com-

68

VERSUS PROSPERITY

plete dependence upon political support by developing local
retail advertising. Naturally they looked upon their foreign
advertising as just so much " velvet" clear gain, since they
had to have had already secured sufficient local support to
keep them going. Under the circumstances it is not
surprising that they made no great efforts to convert
manufacturers to consumer advertising. They were content to
get what they could of the advertising which was created by
the agencies and the magazines. They were not dependent upon
it. No one newspaper could expect to receive a sufficient
volume of any one advertiser's appropriation to justify the
employment of a large force of able men who devoted
themselves exclusively to creating national advertisers.

It is only in comparatively recent years that even their
associations may be said to have seriously undertaken to
"sell" newspaper advertising to the national advertisers.
While it is possible that more national advertising in
dollars and cents goes into the newspapers than the
magazines, this is not due to the conscious creative work of
the newspapers so much as to their sheer numbers in
comparison with the magazines.

Unquestionably our national advertisers are the creations of
our advertising agencies and our national magazines.

69

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

THE INFLUENCE OF NATIONAL ADVERTISING UPON DISTRIBUTION

It is inconceivable that so important a business force could
be injected into distribution without profoundly influencing
the relationship of distribution to production costs.

As we have seen, this growth has taken place in the same
period of time which has seen the percentage rise in
distribution costs.

If graphic curves were plotted, showing the rise year by
year in the percentage of distribution costs, and the rise
year by year in the circulation of the national mediums, the
volume of business placed by the advertising agencies, and
the growth in number and importance of manufacturers who
advertised to the consumer, it would be interesting to see
how closely the curves approximated one another.
Unfortunately, the statistics to plot such curves are not
available.

But since there is sufficient independent evidence of these
relationships; since there is plenty of corroborating
evidence, there is good reason for believing that the
simultaneous growth of national advertising and rise in
distribution costs is more than a mere coincidence.

70

VII

PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

If the word production be confined to those operations which
are involved in actually making an article or commodity,
then the cost of production may be said to consist of the
cost of raw materials (including transportation to the fac-
tory), the cost of labor, and the cost of the overhead
directly applicable to manufacturing only.

Whether a manufacturer's profits are truly earned upon his
investment for production or upon his investment for selling
and advertising depends, of course, upon the extent to which
he is a national advertiser rather than a manufacturer.

Until we determine how a manufacturer's profits are earned,
they should not be considered production costs.
Manufacturers' profits must be allocated to distribution or
production in the proportion in which they are traceable to
one or the other.

The profits of manufacturers who do not advertise are
production profits pure and simple.

But a large part of the profits of manufacturers

71

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

who are national advertisers may really be dividends upon
their investments in goodwill. They are apt to consist
mostly of profits upon their investments for advertising and
only in part profits upon their investments for production.

Manufacturer's profits will therefore be considered in these
articles as a separate factor, and the term production costs
will be confined to the cost of actually making articles.

We can now lay down the principle that the cost of
distribution comprises every cost involved in selling goods
to ultimate consumers over and above the production cost.

It is essential to clearly see all distribution costs (which
include the wholesaling and retailing charges and profits),
as one whole. Unless they are considered as an entity, it is
impossible to determine whether present prices are high
because of too high production costs or too high distribu-
tion costs.

It is certain to cause confused thinking to assume that the
production cost is the price at which the manufacturers sell
their products, for obviously this price includes both
manufacturers' cost of selling and profits. And under the
head of the manufacturers' cost of selling comes in that
great inflater of distribution costs national advertising.

Even in the case of manufacturers whose selling

72

VERSUS PROSPERITY

expense is limited to commissions to brokers, (whose selling
expenses are therefore very small percentages of their
selling price), the mere fact that the prices at which they
sell may be substantially the same as their production costs
does not justify any deviation from what is not merely
logical but strictly in accordance with fact.

In the case of manufacturers who are national advertisers
and who distribute only through wholesalers, the price at
which they sell their products to the wholesalers already
includes a considerable part of the final distribution cost.
The price already includes not merely their profits, but
their expenses for their salesmen and their supervision, and
their total expenditure for advertising.

National advertisers who sell direct to retailers, and
eliminate the wholesalers, include in their price to the
retailers all their production costs and their profits and
all the distribution costs of advertising, wholesaling and
selling.

Finally, the price at which manufacturers who distribute
through their own retail stores direct to the consumer
eliminates no element in distribution costs. It embraces
their production costs and their profits, plus the
distribution costs of advertising, wholesaling and
retailing.

It is obvious, therefore, that the manufacturers who
eliminate jobbers, or both jobbers and

73

ana Distribution Costs of Pro\*\>ct, Sold 'ThroMb Wboh-

Mien.) Cost of Cost of Distribution,

CpmprlaM Comprises

Wholesalers' ,Betaller'

Price. ' Price.

Coroprio

Macflfacture'n\*

Prlo\*.

anfl Distribution Costs When Manufacturers Sell Direct to

Retailers.)

Cort \<" Cost of Distribution.

Protfnctlon.

Bd Distribution Costs. When Manufacturers Sell Plrect to

Consuipers.)

Cost of ' Cost of Distribution.

Production.

Comprises ,

Manufacturers' Price.

These three tables show clearly that the elements which com-
prise the cost of production and the cost of distribution
remain the same, irrespective of the channel through which
the manufacturer sells. Note that while the two elements of
cost as shown by the brackets at the top of each table are
unchanged, those at the bottom of the tables change with
each change in the manufacturer's method of marketing.

VERSUS PROSPERITY

retailers, shift the distribution costs but do not eliminate
them. Whether the ultimate price paid by the consumers for
the products of manufacturers who " eliminate " middlemen
are higher or lower than they would be if they were dis-
tributed through regular trade channels depends upon the
comparative efficiency of their distribution systems and the
regular channels they would otherwise have used. Of course
such manufacturers figure that, even though their own
distribution systems cost more, the higher cost is offset by
the complete control which they have over their own
products, the certainty of their outlets, and the combining
of the profits of manufacturing, wholesaling and retailing
in their own hands.

Perhaps one of the chief causes for our failure to
appreciate the economic consequences of rising distribution
costs has been the general confusion concerning the
distinction between the margin for profit and the margin of
profit.

So long as the margin of profit the net profit made by each
factor in distribution was reasonable, business has assumed
that it might safely ignore the consequences of a spreading
margin for profit.

Defining these two terms will make it clear that it is not
manufacturers', wholesalers', or retailers' net profits that
are responsible for the alarming

75

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

rise in distributing costs, but the ever increasing margin
for profit in its entirety.

" Margin of profit, " according to George Frank Lord in
PRINTERS' INK, "is the net percentage or portion of the
selling price of an article that accrues to the seller after
all his selling expense has been deducted."

"Margin for profit is the gross difference between the
selling price and the cost price."

MABGIN FOR PROFIT: 96.2 PER CENT

The cost of producing a well known nationally advertised
article was 19 cents. The article cost the manufacturer,
after adding the selling expense, and overhead,
approximately \$2.25. It was sold by the manufacturer to
jobbers in large quantities at \$3.10 each. In smaller
quantities the jobber paid a higher price as the discount
was 5 per cent. less.

The jobbers sold it to the retailers at \$3.75.

The retailers sold it to the public at \$5.00.

In the case of this article, the total margin for profit
(from manufacturer to consumer) was \$4.81.

Except for the legitimate but naturally small manufacturing
profit on an article costing 19 cents to produce, the whole
margin for profit 96.2 per cent. represented distribution.

The margin for profit of the retailer was \$1.25.

76

VERSUS PROSPERITY

The margin for profit of the wholesaler was 65 cents.

The margin for profit of the manufacturer was over \$2.91.

Before the margin of profit of each factor in distribution
can be determined, the cost of doing business and the cost
of selling would have to be deducted from their margins for
profit.

In the case of this particular manufacturer, the selling
expense and overhead, including advertising, charged
against' each article, was \$2.06. The manufacturer's net
profit on each article was therefore 85 cents.

DISTRIBUTION COST 80 PER CENT: INSUFFICIENT, PRICE TO
CONSUMER RAISED 50 PER CENT

Let us take another case: The cost of producing this article
was about 20 cents.

The manufacturer sold it to jobbers for about 60 cents.

The jobbers sold it to retailers for about 75 cents.

The retailers sold it to the public for \$1.

The margin for profit of the retailer was 25 cents.

The margin for profit of the jobber was 15 cents.

The margin for profit of the manufacturer was about 35
cents.

77

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

As it cost the manufacturer from 25 to 30 cents to advertise
and sell each article, his margin of profit was 5 to 10
cents on each article.

This nationally advertised article no longer sells for a
dollar. National advertising' has made it possible to raise
the price.

In spite of all the improvements in the processes of
manufacturing during the period since the original price was
established, its price has not been reduced.

In spite of a continually larger " quantity production" of
the article, its price has NOT been reduced.

Here is a national advertising success that has been the
"mold of form and the glass of fashion" for innumerable
ambitious manufacturers. Either because of the advertising
or in spite of it, the manufacturer has had to raise the
price to the the consumer fifty per cent. !

Isn't it obvious in these two cases typical of hundreds
which might be cited, and true to a greater or lesser degree
of nearly all successfully nationally advertised articles
that in order to increase his margin qf profit, the
manufacturer has enormously increased the margin for profit
upon the article?

In any study of the relation of distribution costs to
production costs, can a business force which enables a
manufacturer to thus defy the

78

VERSUS PROSPERITY

ordinary effects of competition fail to come under
justifiable suspicion!

When in addition this force enables the manufacturer to
dictate the conditions under which wholesalers and retailers
shall sell their product, (and in many cases abandon the
ordinary channels of distribution and elimiminate either one
or both in disposing of their product), it gives to the man-
ufacturer the power of increasing the ratio of distribution
to production costs without considering anything except his
ability to induce the public to pay the price he fixes for
his product.

It was previously shown that the elements comprised in
production and distribution remain the same without regard
to whether the manufacturer sells direct to the consumer,
direct to the retailer, or exclusively to the jobber.

Business methods today are basically the same as fifty years
ago. They will remain the same so long as the competitive
system of production and distribution prevails.

If business methods are fundamentally no different from the
time when the classic system of distribution prevailed in
every line of merchandising, why is it that so many
manufacturers have adopted distributing systems of their own
which cut across the established channels of trading?

Study of various lines of merchandise will show that the
national advertisers in each line elim-

79

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

inate the jobbing of their products or both the jobbing and
retailing, whenever in their opinion that makes it easier
for them to maintain the margin for profit which they need
in order to profitably advertise their product. The national
advertiser "cuts out" the jobber and puts on his own force
of salesmen whenever doing so in his judgment enables him to
more securely safeguard his investment in his brand or
trademark. The same motive determines his decision in
continuing distribution through jobbers. It guides him in
establishing his own retail stores. It dominates his whole
work in selling.

Unfortunately the fact that some of the most powerful and
influential manufacturers of the country have thus
undermined the regular channels of distribution, has
lessened the value of these channels for all manufacturers.
The change brought about by national advertisers in the
wholesaling machinery has forced all manufacturers in self
-protection to adopt equally costly methods of selling. It
has tended to break down the special functions of the
various factors in distribution. Today jobbers sell products
packed or made under private brands to protect the lines
they offer to their customers, and retailers do the same
thing to meet the conditions which the demand for nationally
advertised products impose upon them.

80

VIII

NATIONAL ADVERTISING AND THE CHAOS IN DISTRIBUTION

In the classic system of distribution, if it may be called
by so dignified a title, goods moved from manufacturers
through wholesalers and retailers to the public.

Up to about 1890, products of all kinds were distributed
almost wholly through these well established and time tested
channels.

The service which each factor in distribution performed in
the economic life of the nation was clearly understood by
the general public, and the mutual relationship was
recognized as something to be safeguarded in the general
interest by manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers. This
classic system may be likened to an arch; the manufacturers
formed one pillar of the arch; the retailers formed the
other pillar, and in between, the keystone of the arch, was
the jobber.

The jobber was undoubtedly in possession of the strategic
position.

Of the various forces and influences which evolved this
mechanism for distribution, it is well

81

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

worth while identifying some of 'those which still operate.
If they tended at that time to develop distribution by the
classic system, it ought to be worth considering whether the
newer forces which have neutralized their strength, deserve
the support which they are reciving.

Many forces tended to make the wholesaler the chief factor
in distribution.

One was financial. It was natural that capital should have
sought to finance both manufacturing and retailing through
the wholesalers. Perhaps the principal reason was that in
those days the most desirable security for loans was that in
the possession of the wholesalers.

Factories were undesirable from a credit standpoint because
so large a proportion of their assets consisted of fixed
capital. The risk of obsolescence and depreciation added to
the difficulty of liquidating fixed capital in case of
failure made factories unattractive to bankers. On the other
hand, the quick assets on the balance sheet of the average
factory, accounts receivable, finished goods, partly
finished goods, and raw materials, varied with the seasons.
The wholesalers who could dispose of the goods, rather than
the bankers, were logically the men to finance their
production.

The retailers in those days occupied a financial situation
from a credit standpoint like that of

82

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

the small stores of today. Their stocks of merchandise
consisted of small lots and assortments, in such small
quantities of each item that in the case of a failure, it
was best to dispose of the stock at a sacrifice rather than
to spend much effort in trying to sell them at cost.

The story in the case of the wholesalers was altogether
different. Fixtures, a negligible item, represented about
all that they had in the way of fixed capital. Their quick
assets consisted of large quantities of merchandise for
which there was presumably a ready market, and above all, of
accounts receivable and notes receivable from retailers and
factories. The financial judgment of those days turned to
the jobber as the natural medium through which capital could
finance both manufacturers and retailers. And this financial
influence persists to this day in Various forms in many
industries.

Another of these influences might be called the
transportation influence.

The factories, each producing enormous quantities of limited
number of products, found it most economical to pack in
large quantities and to make car load shipments. To ship in
small packages, sufficiently small to meet the needs of an
individual retailer, would have required shipments in less
than car load lots and the organization of a distinct
personnel for this purpose. The

83

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

cost of maintaining such an organization would have had to
be borne by each factory and charged entirely against small
individual sales of a limited number of products.

The wholesaler occupied the strategic position in solving
this problem. He served the manufacturer by buying his
products in large lots and served the retailer by selling
him in small lots.

There were other influences that tended to strengthen the
position of the jobber. Such another influence was the
necessity of many manufacturers who had to make and sell in
one season, whereas the retailer had to receive and sell in
another.

There was the influence of the credit situation, with its
inescapeable geographic aspects. The wholesalers, located in
the center of the territory which they served; intimately
acquainted with the retailers in it to whom they sold not
merely one or two products occasionally, but the whole line
of merchandise for their stores, were in a much better
position to pass upon the credits of retailers than any
factory considering the possibility of selling direct.
Factories, in the very nature of things, locate where it is
cheapest to produce; wholesalers where it is cheapest to
sell. And the geographic element affected shipping just as
much as credit giving.

Finally, there was the problem of selling it-

84

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

self. The fact that the expense of the jobbers' salesmen
were chargeable against large sales of miscellaneous
merchandise, made it possible for them to sell at a lower
cost. Because of the short distances which the jobbers'
salesmen had to travel in covering their territory, they
called upon the trade frequently. Manufacturers obviously
could not afford to maintain such intense selling
organizations, the entire expense of which would have to be
borne by sales of a limited range of products.

In some lines of merchandising the system of distribution
produced by these influences persists to this day almost in
its original strength, even though it is no longer the
simple system which it used to be.

In other lines, it has completely disappeared, and has been
replaced by what may be truly called chaos in distribution.

THE PKESENT CHAOS IN DISTRIBUTION

Our present business era is one in which the dominant note
in most lines of merchandise is struck by those
manufacturers who are national advertisers.

In the period preceding this era of national advertising,
merchandise was distributed to the consumer through the time
tested and well established channels previously described;
from the maker

85

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

to jobbers, from the jobbers to retailers, and from the
retailers to consumers.

No such well established channels of distribution exist
today.

If a man from Mars were to ask the average merchant of today
to describe the system of distribution in his particular
line, the business man's reply would fill a book if it
described conditions fully. And such a book could very
easily be written about nearly every line of trade.

In a great many lines the merchandise reaches consumers by
all of the following distribution methods.

Merchandise made by manufacturers who distribute through
their own retail stores direct to the consumers.

Merchandise made by manufacturers who sell to retailers
direct, but not to consumers.

Merchandise made by manufacturers who sell in part through
their own stores and in part through retailers to whom they
sell direct.

Merchandise made by manufacturers who sell in part through
their own stores; in part through retailers to whom they
sell direct, and in part through jobbers.

Merchandise made by manufacturers who sell to jobbers only.

These may all be manufacturers who place their own brands or
labels on their goods.

86

VERSUS PROSPERITY

But other goods in the same line may not carry any
manufacturer's brand. The merchandise may carry a jobber's
brand.

The jobber may sell his brand in part through retail stores
which he owns or controls, and in part through retailers to
whom he merely sells.

Or he may sell his brand exclusively to retailers.

And in the same line, there will be found retailers mail
order houses, department stores, chain stores with exclusive
brands of their own which manufacturers make up especially
for them.

The same factory may make goods competing with its own
brands under jobbers' brands and under retailers' brands.

Is it an exaggeration to call a state of affairs in which
every producer, every wholesaler, and every retailer
constitutes a law unto himself, a state of anarchy! Each
works out methods of selling or methods of buying in utter
disregard of the general interest. Isn't it possible that
this state of chaos in distribution may be in large part
responsible for the high cost of distribution?

ELIMINATING JOBBERS, BUT NOT JOBBING EXPENSES

I have already shown that the elements comprising the cost
of distribution remain the same irrespective of the channel
through which manufacturers dispose of the production of
their

87

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

factories. Whether the work of distribution be done by a
single company or by three or more separate and distinct
firms, the various elements in the cost of distribution must
always be added to the cost of the article to the consumer.

While modern business recognizes in practice that if goods
produced by the factory system of production are to be
furnished consumers when and where needed, they must be
wholesaled and retailed, it has, under the tutelage of
national advertisers, developed as if this were not true.

It has, for instance, developed as if the eliminating of the
jobbers, eliminated the jobbing expense.

On the contrary; in most cases eliminating a middleman who
distributes his cost of operations over a complete range of
merchandise, tends to increase the cost of distribution.

To establish separate facilities for storage and shipping
and to employ a force of salesmen to reach 1000 retailers
instead of a dozen or fifteen jobbers involves a
multiplication of overheads and selling forces that is
almost always more expensive.

In the case of the national advertiser, it is a question of
reaching the consumer, and nothing short of that will serve.
If, in order to make the advertising pay it is necessary to
create a special distributing organization, or to burden the
product

88

VEESUS PKOSPEKLTY

with a corps of specialty salesmen, the increased expense is
passed on to the tune of "the consumer pays and pays." If,
in the effort to make the advertising effective, the regular
channels of distribution are undermined, that is a matter of
total indifference to the national advertiser.

The inevitable result of the attacks upon the methods of
doing business both of retailers and jobbers, is a sort of
counter-attack.

The jobber tries to protect his trade with a private brand
and the retailer tries to maintain his independent status
with what advertisers call " substituting.'' To the
disorganization caused by the national advertisers is thus
added the disorganization caused by the efforts of
distributors to protect themselves.

A typical result of this disorganization may be found in the
great increase in the number of salesmen. The average
merchant, and the average buyer in a department store, is
literally stormed by an army of salesmen, each striving to
place his line with the distributor, and each consuming as
much of the time of the buyer as he can secure. The work of
buying is enormously more burdensome today than fifty years
ago, and to the increased cost for maintaining the armies of
salesmen must be added the increased cost of buying.

Of course the rise of national advertising is

89

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

not the sole cause of the changes in the distributing
system. The two main causes of the distributed conditions
may be summarized as (1) the changes in buying habits caused
by the increase in the number of large retailers or retail
buying combinations, and (2) the changes in distributing
methods caused by national advertising.

The advent of the department store, the mail order house,
and the chain store was accompanied by full recognition upon
the part of nearly everybody of their effect upon
distributing conditions.

But the coming of national advertising, which has had a much
profounder effect upon distribution has been but little
appreciated.

THE NATIONAL ADVERTISERS' CONTRIBUTION TO OUR DISTRIBUTION
CHAOS

"If," says the manufacturer (in an imaginary conversation
reported in PRINTERS' INK), " Jones, the jobber, hadn't put
out his private brand in competition with mine, I wouldn't
have had any fault to find. He's pushing his own goods, and
at the same time handling mine. He won't let me know where
my own goods are for sale, for fear I'll go over his head to
the retailers. Consequently, between inability to stimulate
and help my dealers, and the jobber naturally pushing his
own brand in preference, I'm up a tree, and I'll

90

VERSUS PROSPERITY

go direct to the retailer if he doesn't come to time/'

"If," says the jobber, "Martin, the manufacturer, hadn't cut
me out and gone over my head direct to the retailer, I
wouldn't have put out my private brand."

"If," says the retailer, "Jones, the jobber, hadn't gone
also into the retailing business, I'd not have accepted the
direct prices of the manufacturer and wouldn't have gone
into the field of wholesaling, too."

Here PRINTERS' INK reports complaints from each of the three
factors involved in distribution, but very significantly
leaves out the kind of manufacturer who is really
responsible for the complaints of each of the parties quoted
above.

Today there are really two kinds of manufacturers those who
are national advertisers, and those who are not.

The relations between distributors and manufacturers who are
national advertisers and between distributors and those who
are not advertisers are very different.

The advertising manufacturer sells to the trade the demand
for his trademarlced article.

The other sells merchandise, and merchandise only.

No jobber is ever afraid of pushing the product of the
manufacturer who sells him merchandise,

91

NATIONAL ADVEBTISING

But lie dislikes to push the product of a manufacturer who
is a national advertiser, because he has good reason for
fearing that that manufacturer will ultimately go over his
head direct to the retailer.

In addition, he can put into the selections of merchandise
made for him something of his own individuality. But he can
put nothing of his own, either with regard to quality or
price, into the product of the national advertiser.

Naturally he defends himself, and his defense takes either
of two directions: He packs a private brand of his own in
competition with the nationally advertised brand, or he
acquires retail outlets of his own by control or outright
purchase.

If his counter-attack takes the form of private brands, he
really .becomes a miniature national advertiser in his own
territory, and inevitably incurs not merely the enmity of
the national advertisers, but also of all of the other
manufacturers whose products he handles.

If he buys control of retail outlets, he can insure a
satisfactory volume of sales for his own merchandise, but he
does this at the risk of offending retailers who may feel
that he represents a potential competitor of theirs.

Isn't it obvious that the national advertisers really
started the sequence of events that are

92

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the causes of the complaints voiced in the paragraphs quoted
from PRINTERS' INK?

Because the national advertiser limited his profits and
methods of doing business, the jobber put out a private
brand.

Because the jobber put out a private brand, the manufacturer
eliminated him and went direct to the retailer.

Because the manufacturer went direct to the retailer, the
jobber went into retailing.

And so on, through the myriad variations, all of which have
their real origin in the refusal of some manufacturer to be
content with success built upon the making of merchandise
and his insistence upon making profits upon his ability in
advertising.

The jobber, the manufacturer and the retailer are
interchanging functions.

Today each duplicates, to some extent, the other's machinery
of distribution; each adds to the number of brands upon the
market, and each tends to increase the hazards and costs of
doing the essential work of supplying the market with goods.
These increased hazards and costs are, of course, part of
the elements which enter into the fixing of the price levels
of merchandise, and thus national advertising tends to raise
the price even of merchandise which is not advertised at
all.

93

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

Of course, in some lines of merchandise jobbing in the
old-fashioned sense may be eliminated without the cost of
performing the work of the jobber having to be greater. When
the purchase made by an individual retailer from a
.manufacturer is large, the manufacturer's cost of selling
may be no higher than the discount he would have to give to
the jobber.

But in many lines the jobber cannot be eliminated, in spite
of the fact that prominent national advertisers in the same
line may refuse to sell jobbers and sell direct to retailers
only. In such lines, the manufacturers who sell direct make
either the retailer or the consumer pay for the excess of
selling and distributing expense due to their extravagant
method of distribution.

Take the case of the big five packers, for example. Their
distribution system, buttressed with enormous national
advertising, was supposed to be so economical and efficient
that it was often referred to in superlative terms. But now
comes Secretary Toulme of the National Wholesale Grocers'
Association and shows that the notion was a fallacy. He says
that the recent attempt at a combination of certain of the
packers is really an admission of the failure of direct
selling, because "the costs of going around the wholesale
grocer are too high." Formerly the

94

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

packers made use of the wholesalers, who, " selling and
distributing several thousand commodities, did the work of
distributing cheaper than the manufacturer selling but one
line." As Mr.  Toulme puts it, their " costs and profits are
forced to the lowest minimum by the keenest competition. "

There are three possible solutions of the difficulty in
which the advertising manufacturer who wants to secure the
full benefit of his advertising finds himself.

He may ignore the established channels of distribution and
create his own selling organization to go direct to
retailers or consumers.

He may continue to distribute through the established
channels, but by greatly increasing the margin for profit of
the wholesalers and retailers secure their cooperation.

He may increase the volume of his national advertising and
create such a demand for his product that the retailers and
jobbers dare not refuse to handle it, and recoup for his
greater expenditure by reducing their the margin for profit.

Whichever solution he selects, the public loses. Whether the
distributors lose or not depends upon the nature of the
article and the method of advertising which the manufacturer
employs.

95

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

THE INFLUENCE OF THE LARGE RETAILER

Of the changes in business methods in the past fifty years
which are mainly responsible for the present chaos in
distribution the coming of national advertising and the
advent of the large retailer there remains to be considered
the effect upon distribution of the arrival of the
department store, the mail order house, and the chain store.

The success of these mercantile institutions was something
achieved in spite of the bitter opposition of the small and
independent retailers. In this Apposition they were assisted
to a considerable degree by those jobbers who found that
these new retailers were able to dispense with their
services.

Traces of the conflict persist to this day, though the small
retailers no longer fear annihilation at the hands of their
larger competitors.

Small retailers have actually multiplied in numbers. In
spite of department stores, chain stores, and mail order
houses, they continue to flourish, and many of them flourish
under the very shadows of the huge structures which house
their competitors.

Now that the echoes of that first furious battle have almost
disappeared, it is apparent that the coming of these new
types of merchants served merely to introduce new standards
of retailing,

96

VERSUS PROSPERITY

and to insure better values in merchandise and service from
all retailers.

Of the various improvements in retailing which accompanied
the establishment of the new retailing, perhaps the most
important was that embodied in the phrase ' ' satisfaction
or your money back."

The principle of "let the buyer beware" has disappeared in
retailing since this maxim was accepted. Many of the most
startling innovations of the pioneer department stores, such
as the marking of goods in plain prices and the abolition of
higgling, are merely varying aspects of the same principle.

It is unfortunate that the public itself has failed to take
full advantage of the possibilities involved in the logical
development of this principle.

For, at the very time that the retailers of the nation,
under pressure of the new competition, discarded one after
another the principle of "let the buyer beware," the
national advertisers started their propaganda which made the
public believe that every retailer was an incipient ' \*
substituter" bent upon selling inferior merchandise at an
excessive profit.

There is no doubt that this propaganda has been exceedingly
effective. The suggestion repeated in a myriad forms in
millions of advertise-

97

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

ments year after year, that the retailer always sought to
substitute inferior merchandise, is in large part
responsible for the average consumer 's failure to feel full
confidence in the recommendations of retailers. But the day
is bound to come when the public will appreciate that
retailers have the most to lose in giving poor values, and
that the retailers, and not the national advertisers, are
logically those to whom consumers should turn for guidance
in their buying.

THE NEW EETAILERS AND THE OLD JOBBEES

In spite of the very great differences between the old and
the new methods of retailing between a corner grocery and a
department store, between a country general store and a mail
order house the essential nature of the service both render
to consumers is the same.

While it is true from an economic standpoint that the advent
of the new retailers did not introduce any additional
elements in distribution; in so far as the jobbers and
manufacturers were concerned, it did introduce an altogether
new type of wholesale buyer.

The new retailers bought merchandise in such large
quantities that they were in position to demand the same
discounts from manufacturers which previously were accorded
exclusively to jobbers.

VERSUS PROSPERITY

The national advertisers, as we have seen, were engaged in
demoralizing the classic system of distribution by going
over the heads of the jobbers to the retailers. The new
retailers, with an attack from the other end of the chain,
assisted in the work.

The resulting shifting about of the wholesaling function is
shown by the following table. The headings represent the
various functions involved in production and distribution.
The first line represents those who performed the various
functions when wholesalers still did all the wholesaling.
The second line shows the change which took place when the
new retailer assumed the function and bought direct from
manufacturers. The third line shows the change when (as a
result of the conditions brought about by the national
advertisers), manufacturers undertook their own wholesaling
and sold direct to retailers.

Making Wholesaling Retailing Consuming

Manufacturer Wholesaler Retailer Consumer

Manufacturer Retailer Retailer Consumer

Manufacturer Manufacturer Retailer Consumer

Of course, our present methods of distribution are not
divisible into three such clear-cut systems. One
manufacturer may distribute in all three ways; another in
two ways out of the three; another in one way only. One
manufacturer may

99

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

make only his own brands; another may make no branded goods
at all, while a third may make his own brands and a variety
of private brands which may compete with his own in the
consumer market.

THE IRREPRESSIBLE CONFLICT

It is a curious fact that the two main factors in causing
the present day complexities of distribution the large
retailer and the national advertiser are diametrically
opposed to each other in fundamental interests.

The large retailer is a direct descendant of the merchant
adventurers of old. He scours the world for goods. He is his
own master. He formulates his own merchandising policy,
feels responsibility to the consumer broadly and directly,
and naturally resents the intrusion of any factor which
seeks to make of him a mere automaton.

The national advertisers find it difficult to do business
upon their principles with a real merchant.

National advertising, logically, requires that nationally
advertised goods shall be uniform not only in quality, but
also in price. The recurring efforts of national advertisers
to secure for themselves the right to fix resale prices upon
their trademarked goods is evidence of this fact.

Carried to its ultimate goal, national ad100

VERSUS PROSPERITY

vertising would reduce the retailer to a mere slot machine,
distributing uniform articles at uniform prices.

Retailers would cease to render a selective service for
their customers, and would no longer compete with other
retailers in the giving of values. There would be no real
competition between retailers. The business would go to the
retailer who was handiest.

Instead, all competition would be between the national
advertisers.

The battle for the consumers' trade would be fought out with
advertising space. The manufacturer with the biggest
advertising appropriation and the ablest advertising brains
would succeed in impressing the largest group of con- sumers
with the superiority of his products. And as a result, the
average retailer's stock would consist of nationally
advertised brands roughly apportioned among the various
brands in accordance with the relative effectiveness of
their advertising campaigns.

The reaction of real merchants to the consequences of
national advertising is not a matter of conjecture. Even
when they submit and stock nationally advertised
merchandise, they do it with various significant
reservations.

When a merchant risks his all upon the nationally advertised
lines and makes no effort to

101

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

carry lines of "-his" own selection, it is a mistake to call
him a merchant. The retailer who establishes a business
which handles nationally advertised lines primarily can be
called a merchant only by courtsey; he is in reality an
agent of the various advertised lines he carries. And, like
all agents, he has to sell upon margins of profit, upon
terms and policies which are largely determined by the will
of his principals.

The smaller a merchant the more difficult is it for him to
resist. Yet no merchant should find it easier to do so. He
is in most intimate touch with his customers. If he cannot
inspire them with confidence in his judgment, it is no one's
fault but his own.

A large merchant a department store, for instance finds it
much easier to dispense with nationally advertised goods,
and many of them do so, finding it possible to give better
values to their customers, even though their profits on such
goods may be larger.

The largest merchants of all, the mail order houses, find it
possible to do almost entirely away with nationally
advertised goods, and they give, naturally enough, perhaps
the greatest values of all.

The conflict between the merchant and the national
advertiser is irrepressible. No amount of ingenious trade
helps, and certainly none of the

102

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

ordinary sophisms, can obscure the fact that the national
advertisers have one set of interests and the real merchants
another set.

The national advertisers need delivery agents, not
merchants, for their goods. The less the agent can say, the
better for them.

The effort to preserve their individuality engages not
merely the interests of merchants, but their self-respect as
well.

I do not mean to suggest that a retailer cannot make a
success of a store primarily devoted to the sale of
nationally advertised merchandise. But I do mean to say that
he can make a bigger success of a store that is devoted to
the sale of merchandise which he knows is the best in value
that he can offer his trade.

An advertising man once made the statement to me that he
could go into any average city, open an up-to-date store,
stock it with well-known nationally advertised lines, and "
clean up/'

I admitted the possibility. But I questioned the probability
of his being able to do so if there was one real merchant in
the town. That merchant, I pointed out, could make a virtue
of the very fact that the new store was devoted to the
nationally advertised lines. By talking values to the
public, telling the story of his merchandise, and, above
all, by flat-f ootedly saying that it was impossible to
equal his values in nationally ad-

103

NATIONAL ADVEBTISING

vertised merchandise, he could more than hold his own.

It is natural for manufacturer to compete with manufacturer,
and for retailer to compete with retailer. It is not
natural, and yet it is inevitable, that retailers should
compete with national advertisers.

I have said that the conflict is irrepressible. Will it
continue a sort of draw, with national advertisers in some
lines having a shade the better of the argument, and in
other lines a shade the worse, or will one of the two
acquire a definite ascendancy?

Not being a prophet, I can only hazard an opinion. There are
straws which indicate which way the wind blows. A
combination of tendencies, such as an increase of consumer
skepticism and a multiplication of advertising appeals, may
be sufficient to make national advertising unprofitable. It
is impossible to fool all the people all the time. Within
ten years the merchants of America may reduce national
advertising as a business force to a state of impotence.

104

IX

ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF NATIONAL ADVERTISING

In beginning these articles, I asked, among others, this
question:

Is national advertising a good thing for others than the
manufacturers who are successful, the advertising agencies,
and the advertising mediums 1

It is worth while, before studying just how national
advertising "moves its miracles to perform," to consider to
what extent this question has been answered.

Up to the present time I have discussed various tendencies
in business and their effects upon the manufacturers,
distributors and consumers. Before turning to other aspects
of the matter, it is worth recalling the high points in
these first articles in this study of the economic
consequences of national advertising.

1.  Created a Wasteful Conflict. National advertising has
    created a useless and wasteful conflict between
    retailers, wholesalers and manufacturers, by trying to
    reduce retailers to mers

105

NATIONAL ADVEKTISING

vending machines operated in accordance with the will of
national advertisers.

2.  Demoralized Distribution. It has demoralized
    distribution, by contributing largely to breaking down
    the separate functions of the various distributors. It
    has produced the present chaotic state in which
    standards of merchandise are lost in a maze of brands.
    Instead of the various factors in distribution
    cooperating to move goods, there is a constant "
    sabotaging" of nationally advertised and private brands.

3.  Reduced the Usefulness of the Jobber. It has been the
    principal factor in destroying the usefulness of the
    jobber as a purely distributing mechanism, and has
    caused jobbers in self-defense to invade the
    manufacturing field with private brands and the
    retailing field with stores which the jobber controlled.

4.  Changed the Basis of Profits. It has greatly increased
    the margins for profit upon lines of merchandise in
    which nationally advertised brands hold a dominant
    position, and by enabling successful national
    advertisers to fix the ratio of distribution to
    production costs, has increased their net profits while
    limiting the net profits of wholesalers and retailers.

5.  Raised Distribution Costs. It has helped to increase
    distribution costs by duplicating and reduplicating
    parts of the general machinery of dis-

106

VERSUS PROSPERITY

tribution, and under the pretense of eliminating middlemen
has replaced distribution through retailers and wholesalers,
with distribution through extravagant selling organizations
maintained by individual manufacturers.

6.  Raised Consumer Prices. It has raised consumer prices
    and prevented the public from securing the benefit of
    lower costs of production, partly by shifting the basis
    of competition from the salability to the
    advertisability of merchandise, and partly by "
    high-pressure" extravagances in selling, it has made
    distribution for all manufacturers more hazardous and
    costly.

7.  Ignored Value-Giving. It has consistently ignored the
    necessity of " value-giving, " by pricing nationally
    advertised merchandise upon the basis of values
    subjectively created in the consumer's mind by
    emphasizing factitious and fictitious superiorities and
    by ignoring the objective value of the actual
    merchandise.

8.  Attacked Competition. It has attacked competition as an
    inadequate regulator of price, quality and value, and to
    the extent to which it was possible to create consumer
    demand at advertised prices or to maintain prices under
    the law, has substituted for competitive price fixing,
    the principle of "charging all that the traffic would
    bear."

9.  Profiteered. It has enabled the successful

107

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

national advertisers to take enormous profits upon their
ability in inducing the public to pay dividends upon their
investments in good will.

10. Injured Business. It has expended millions of dollars in
    multiplying the agencies of consumer appeal solely in
    its efforts to aggrandize itself at the expense of the
    public, the retailers and the wholesalers; it has
    restricted the buying-power of the consumers of the
    nation, by inducing them to pay luxury prices for
    staples, and thus has injuriously affected the general
    prosperity.

108

PAET II

THE RETAILER AND THE NATIONAL ADVERTISER

THE CONSUMES AND THE RETAILER

The consumer is essentially a two-legged animal which
fulfills its needs and desires by purchasing merchandise.

As a mere animal he has needs that are precisely the same as
those of the consumer of a hundred years ago, and of the
consumer of a thousand years ago.

His needs for food, clothing, and shelter have not been
increased or decreased by changing custom.

Yet it is almost impossible for the typical consumer of
today to draw a distinct line between the things which are
necessary to sustain life, and the things which are
necessary to sustain a comfortable existence; between
merchandise which is purchased to satisfy needs and that
which is purchased to satisfy desires,.

THE CHANGE IN THE CONSUMER

Fifty years ago the consumer found it easier to distinguish
between necessities and luxuries. It has been one of the
achievements of the past half

111

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

century to so transform merchandise as to make what was at
one time a necessity cost as much as former luxuries, and to
make many obvious luxuries seem necessary to life.

Fifty years ago cereals, such as oatmeal and cornmeal, were
necessities which furnished a considerable proportion of the
average individual's total nutriment.

Today the consumer no longer buys cereals as cereals. He
buys " breakfast food." He buys the same cereals as of yore,
but flaked, rolled, puffed and shredded so as to make them
advertisable. He pays luxury prices for them, though still
believing that he is purchasing a necessary of life.

Speaking of conditions fifty years ago and of the intensity
with which the merchandise itself figured in buying, George
F. Parker said in THE

SATUBDAY EVENING POST:

"The responsibility thrust upon the housewife in the
purchase of goods for clothing was always serious and heavy.
It involved a general knowledge of textiles now almost lost
from disuse. If intended for winter garments, the principal
consideration was to determine whether it was all wool and a
yard wide, as well as its capacity for shrinkage; and the
way the goods were pulled apart and their warp and woof
examined was often the despair of the storekeeper with

112

VERSUS PROSPERITY

whom patience, whether natural or acquired, has to be a
virtue. In prints or ginghams the one question was, will it
wash? In this line the knowledge of the seeker counted for
less; but the seller's penalty for mistake or
misrepresentation was likely to be imposed even more
promptly than in the case of woolens/'

Today the consumer no longer subjects merchandise to any
such searching scrutiny. He has been taught to look for the
label.

This transformation in the habits of the consumer has been
effected only in part by the new standards in retailing. It
has been mainly the work of national advertisers who have
skillfully exploited and capitalized the psychological weak-
ness of the consumer.

If this change had made the consumer a more discriminating
judge of merchandise, it would represent real progress. But
the fact that it has made the consumer a poorer judge of
merchandise values shows that however the process of
effecting the transformation be dignified it yet involved
the methods of charlatanism and quackery.

THE CHANGE IN THE EETAILEE

When I go into a grocery store today, I am confronted with
shelf after shelf of cartons, bottles, and cans. There are
probably fifteen kinds of breakfast foods, twelve sorts of
soap, six

113

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

brands of baking powder, several brands of extracts, soups,
cooking fats, and syrups.

If I ask for a pound of cream of tartar baking powder, the
probability is that the clerk will look at me blankly. He is
not used to selling a baking powder as baking powder. He is
only used to selling certain brands of powder for that
purpose. In nine cases out of ten he will be entirely use-
less to me in helping me to an intelligent selection of the
best value among the various brands. He will probably show
me the various brands of baking powder which he carries, and
leave me to make my selection from among them. In sheer
desperation, I will probably take the best known of the
brands, and so fall a victim to the very situation which the
manufacturer of the brand had spent fortunes in developing.
If I analyze my purchase afterwards, I will in all
probability find that I have paid not only the highest price
asked for any of the cans from which I made my selection,
but that the pound which I wanted to buy was only a pound in
a figurative sense, and that instead of having bought a
16-ounce can, I had only secured a 12-ounce can.

The consumer of today is confronted with similar
difficulties with regard to the greater part of his
expenditures. He lives and has his being in an atmosphere of
brands, labels and trademarks, and loses sight of the
merchandise under

114

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the incessant hammering and bombardment from every newspaper
and magazine and point of vantage as to the importance of
looking for the label.

What should the consumer do!

It is a sheer absurdity to think that buying advertised
goods is a sufficient principle to guide the consumer in
buying. The real question in many cases is, which of the
advertised brands should be bought? Whenever the retailer
gives the national advertiser complete freedom in guiding
the consumer, the consumers will buy the various brands in
proportion to the effectiveness of their advertising.

Of course the true principle which should guide the consumer
is judgment in accordance with the merits of the merchandise
itself.

But the consumer no longer has a general knowledge of
merchandise. He has been trained to think of brands, and not
of commodities.

Since he lacks adequate technical knowledge of the
merchandise itself, what is there left for the consumer to
do I

He can turn to the retailer for guidance.

It is true that today many retailers, some of them very
successful retailers, cannot guide him in this way. They too
are unable to distinguish the various trees in the forest of
advertised labels. They conduct their business with a
surprising lack of knowledge of the merchandise they sell.

115

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

But so long as they are good judges of the relative demand
for the various brands on the market, they can cope with the
merchandising situation created by the national advertisers.

The moment the consumer starts to hunt for a retailer who
knows the merchandise he handles; where it comes from; what
it is made of; how it is made, and what constitutes its
degrees of excellence in that moment the slot machine re-
tailer loses a customer; the real merchant gains a customer,
and the national advertisers lose one of the army of
consumers whose buy ing-blindness has enabled them to create
their towering capitalizations of good-will.

THE RETAILER AND THE CONSUMER

If I were a retailer, and worried, as all retailers have
been worried for the past decade, by my customers'
complaints about rising prices, I would either justify my
existence as a retailer, or go into a line of business where
I could.

I would find myself determine what was my function in the
present scheme of things.

Then I would sell my policy, whatever it might be, to my
customers if it was salable. And if it wasn't salable, if it
didn't satisfy them, I would change it for some policy that
would satisfy them, or go into some other business.

I would take my customers sufficiently into my 116

VERSUS PROSPERITY

confidence to sell them on the merits of the basis on which
I did business. I would want them to know that I was not a
mere animated vending machine, giving them what they thought
they wanted, but a real merchant; a merchandise expert; that
merchandise values were my religion, and that by making my
customers ' true interest correspond with my own, I fastened
them to my store with chains of real service. I would want
them to know that I was not at the head of a mere delivery
service, but that mine was truly a selective service, for
the community in which I lived.

For one thing, I wouldn't just drift with the tide on this
question of rising prices. The suspicion of encouraging or
being responsible for high prices is a terrible handicap to
any business. / would let my customers know why a retailer
can be with the customer in the effort to get lower prices.

And I wouldn't pose as a philanthropist for being with them.

I would show my customers that my success is determined not
by the profit made on the merchandise I sell so much as on
the volume of my sales. Assuming that I am a grocer, I would
show them that the average customer in my store spends \$50
per month for groceries, and that each adds to my volume of
sales to that extent just as

117

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

long as my service and my values suited them better than
those of another retailer.

Since my gross profit will average the same on their total
purchases, it doesn't make a particle of difference whether
prices go up or down so long as they spend \$50 per month
with me. If I can give them more groceries or better
groceries for their money and by far-sighted merchandising
reduce the prices on the things they buy, that would not
affect my profit because it would hardly affect the
proportion of their earnings which they spent for groceries.
But it would act as a powerful selling force in holding the
customer and getting all his trade.

At all hazards I would sell them on the proposition that as
a retailer it wasn't their occasional purchases that I
wanted badly, but their regular trade.

To do this effectively might seem difficult, but coupled
with the fact that I would begin talking merchandise to them
as never before, the final effect upon consumers would be
certain.

I wouldn't be afraid of being technical.

When a man is considering the buying of a suit of clothing,
he is interested in clothing. He may not particularly care
about enlarging his knowledge of woolens, and style and
tailoring ordinarily, but when he is in a buying frame of
mind he is anxious to listen to the merchant who can

118

VERSUS PROSPERITY

talk convincingly about these things. He will trust the
judgment of the merchant who knows, and shows that he knows
why the article which he offers is a better piece of
merchandise than any other he might buy, and why and how the
customer should go about judging the value of the mer-
chandise himself.

Above all, I would get out of the habit of hiding behind
glittering generalities. If I were a clothier, I wouldn't
talk about having the latest styles, and the best tailoring,
and the finest woolens. If my clothes justify these
superlatives, these qualites must be inherent in the clothes
themselves. I would therefore tell the public something
specific about the styles I had in stock, and why I had
selected them. I would tell them what the woolens were,
where they came from, and why the various patterns and
weaves were selected by me.

In this way, by a policy of educating my customers, I would
get away from the atmosphere of high pressure selling.

This policy I would inaugurate, not at the selling end of my
business, but at the buying end.

I wouldn't handle anything, no matter how well known nor how
effectively advertised, that didn't represent the best value
which I could offer my trade.

Above all, just as I would cease trying to get 119

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

business by sheer high pressure selling, I would insist that
those who sold me merchandise should talk merchandise to me
and not the resalability of consumer demand.

I am indebted to PEINTEBS' INK for the following story:

A famous clothing house, which has made national advertising
the cornerstone of its policy, has always instructed its
salesmen to make their advertising the keynote of their
selling talk. Their salesmen (who are on salary, not
commission), talk little else but advertising to dealers.
One dealer who listened to a long and interesting
delineation of what the manufacturer had done, was doing,
and would do in the way of advertising, suddenly said, "Yes,
that's fine, but what about the clothes V 9

120

XI

THE RETAILER AND THE NATIONAL ADVERTISER

The merchandising policy which I recommend is not a new
policy. It is the policy of some merchants today. But
curiously, it is the policy which generally prevailed prior
to the time that nationally advertised merchandise became
dominant factors in so many lines. To put it again into
general effect, merchants must look upon nationally
advertised merchandise as "suspect," just exactly as it was
"suspect" when it first made its appearance.

In those days, the burden of proof that nationally
advertised merchandise was not overpriced was upon the
manufacturers who spent fortunes for advertising.

When their salesmen talked to merchants, they had to
overcome methods of buying based upon centuries of
mercantile experience. They had to convince wholesalers and
retailers that they should substitute, for the mere
merchandise of those days, the trademarked and advertised
articles which they were introducing.

121

NATIONAL ADVEETISINa

Under the assault of the national advertisers all the old
standards and grades of merchandise have been undermined or
destroyed.

It is a rank absurdity to speak of trademarked articles as
having introduced standardization. They are simply
uniformized specialties which have been substituted for
standard grades.

Standardization requires the establishment by authority or
by custom of various grades to which all manufacturers
conform.

Instead of nationally advertised products conforming to the
standards in various lines, they generally cut athwart the
established standards. They are usually a little better than
the poorest, a little poorer than the best. They generally
grade as polished mediocrities. They are, it is true,
uniform in quality, form, and content. Generally claims are
made that they are "best," and it is difficult to disprove
the truth of these claims because so many of them depart
from standard merchandise in some particular feature.

STANDARDIZATION

"Advertising," says one of the syndicated advertisments of
the Advertising Association of Advertising Agencies "has
standardized almost every article you can buy."

What is meant in the above statement by "standardized?"

122

VERSUS PROSPERITY

By a liberal interpretation of the meaning of the
standardization, it may mean either of two things:

First, that the advertising of a product tends to make that
product the accepted measure of quality in its line.

Second, that prior to the present era of national advertised
products, no standards existed with regard to most of the
articles bought by the public.

Both of these are half-truths which lead to entirely wrong
conclusions.

THE TENDENCY TO UNIFORMITY

The national advertising of a product does make it possible
to buy the same identical product in widely separated
communities, and to continue the buying of an identical
product over considerable intervals of time.

In spite of this tendency to uniformity, there are many
instances in which advertised products have changed in size,
in composition and in quality without the consumers of the
product being made acquainted with the changes. In fact,
changes are generally made without consulting any one in the
trade the maker taking it for granted that so long as the
public is kept persuaded that the brand is all that counts,
no one else has any interest in the matter. It would not be
difficulty to

123

NATIONAL ADVEKTISING

match any list of nationally advertised products which have
remained uniform for a long period of time with another list
of nationally advertised products which have been radically
changed in the same period of time.

National advertisers do not really try to standardize
products, but to create a public taste and demand that can
be satisfied with a uniform product. National advertising
tends to " standardize " demand; it tends to destroy grades
and standards in merchandise.

It is true that in any line of merchandise in which some one
advertised product is the dominant product in volume of
sales, that this product is sometimes the accepted measure
of value in its line. In most lines, however, there are so
many advertised products that it is simply ridiculous to
speak of them as standardized in this sense.

KEAL STANDARDIZATION

The Government of the United States has established for
decades through the United States Pharmacopeia standards for
almost every product in the line of drugs. The Pharmacopeia
gives the accepted specifications. There can be no question
about the fact that drugs made by these formulas represent
drug standardization. The public can buy standardized drugs
made by nearly all the drug manufacturers.

124

VERSUS PROSPERITY

But these are not the products which are nationally
advertised by the manufacturers. When a drug manufacturer
starts to advertise a product, he almost invariably departs
from the Pharmacopeia, or if he sticks to it, he carefully
conceals the fact that his brand is the identical grade or
standard which can be purchased from other manufacturers.

What is true of drugs, is true in almost every line. Grades
and standards of the various products automatically put in
their appearance as soon as a product is regularly bought
and sold. The specifications which embody these standards
are not always embodied in a Government publication, but
they are still definite enough to guide buyers and sellers
in comparing qualities.

So long as the product itself is the thing that determines a
retailer's decision in stocking merchandise which is offered
to him, it is important for him to determine its actual
size, composition and quality so that he can determine how
it compares with the various grades made of the merchandise.

But the moment the product is nationally advertised and it
is the consumer demand for the product that determines the
merchants \> decision in stocking it, the question of
whether it conforms to the accepted standards plays no part
in his decision.

125

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

The disappearance of real standardization in any line of
products is always followed by the distortion of the
public's sense of values, by " slotmachines ." retailing,
and by competition between manufacturers in national
advertising.

The manufacturer of an article which is not nationally
advertised has obviously a vital interest in the
preservation of the practice of buying in accordance with
the merchandise standards, because so long as retailers and
consumers measure\^ value in this way, products will sell
upon the merits put into manufacturing them and not into
advertising them.

THE WASTE IN MULTIPLYING BEANDS

The whole problem of buying and selling would resolve itself
into something like its original simplicity if merchants
carried different grades of a product, and refused to carry
different brands of substantially similar quality.

I went into a hardware store to buy a wrench. The salesman
brought two wrenches, one of which he priced at \$1.00 and
the other at \$1.50. I examined the two wrenches carefully
and so far as I could see there was nothing about the
wrenches to account for the great difference in price. I
asked the salesman whether he knew what the difference
between them was. "Why," he said, pointing to

126

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

the \$1.50 wrench, "this one is the famous 'XXX' wrench
which is advertised in all the magazines." "I know that," I
replied. "What I would like to know is where the fifty per
cent, difference in quality comes in." He looked at me a
little blankly, then said he would ask the merchant him-
self about the matter. The owner, evidently interested by my
inquiry, came over with the salesman. He looked at me with a
twinkle in his eye and said: "To be perfectly frank with
you, there is no difference between the wrenches them-
selves. The 'XXX\* wrench is widely advertised. Many of my
customers ask for it. It costs me more than half agaiu as
much as the other and I have to charge my customers accord-
ingly."

The merchant carried a stock of wrenches twice as large as
the needs of his customers required, because he felt he had
to carry that two brands. If wrenches were standardized, and
bought and sold by grade rather than brand, everybody would
have been the gainer.

But the evil of this lack of standardization goes deeper
than the multiplying of the merchant's stock. It is bad
enough for a merchant to carry, as one investigator put it,
six or seven varieties of women's knit underwear, when the
largest store on State Street, (Chicago, carries

127

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

only one brand, or to carry seventy-two brands of women's
stockings, as one Boston store did, until it found that
fourteen covered 89 per cent, of consumer 's requirements.

What is an even greater evil is the miseducation of the
public which results from this. The public gets accustomed
to buying by brand, and not by grade, and it judges the
relative merits of different brands not by the quality of
the products, but by what it reads about them in ad-
vertisements and by the prices asked for them. The retailer
ultimately becomes the victim of the public habit. He builds
up a demand among his customers for a certain brand. The
greater the demand which he creates, the more does he place
himself in the power of the manufacturer upon whom he is
dependent for the product.

The larger retailers have met this difficulty by selling
brands of their own.

One way in which groups of retailers, each with small
volumes of sales, have sought to meet this difficulty has
been to cooperatively manufacture or pack brands of their
own. The druggists have been notably successful in doing
this, and the A.D.'S. brand has become a real factor in the
total volume of business done by the druggists of the
country.

There is, however, another and more fundamental method of
attacking the problem. This

128

VERSUS PROSPERITY

is through the development of genuine standardization.

Why should not the retailers' organizations of the country
appoint committees for the purpose of drafting
specifications covering the various grades of the most
important products they handle? These specifications should
not, of course, seek to establish absolute uniformity in
products, but to create a uniform basis for comparing
products. They would form a measure of value which would
guide manufacturers, retailers and consumers. The retailers
alone are logically equipped to do this, as they stand
midway between the consumers and producers. Such speci-
fications, revised regularly, would help manufacturers in
designing their products, retailers in buying their stocks
and the public in choosing their purchases.

In certain lines, where the products are staple from year to
year, this sort of standardization presents no difficulty.
In lines of merchandise where style and pattern play the
most important part, the specifications would have to relate
to materials and operations rather than products.

If a committee investigating the rural schools of New York
was able to draught a set of specifications covering all
that entered into the building and equipment of a school, so
that any school from the little one-room school house to a
large

129

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

consolidated school could be rated, surely similar
specifications could be developed with regard to merchandise
no matter how complicated its production. If various
organizations of farmers could draught specifications for
standard living things horses, cows, chickens specifications
can be draughted concerning mere inanimate products and
commodities.

There would then be substituted for the present chaos in
buying, an authoritative guide by which merchants could
regulate their selection of commodities, and the merchants
could use these specifications in convincing their customers
that what they recommended furnished the best values that
could be secured.

UNIFOBMITY AND STANDABDIZATION

There is an important difference between uniformity in a
product and the standardization of a product.

The misunderstanding of this by advocates of national
advertising has given to nationally advertised products a
reputation for a good quality to which they are not
entitled.

Let me quote a writer in PKTNTEBS' INK on this matter:

"We are led to buy an effectively advertised article partly
on account of its wide distribution. You know that once you
try and like it, you

130

VERSUS PROSPERITY

will be able to secure it everywhere. \* Universal
accessibility/ then, if you please, is a quality peculiar to
the advertised article, and this exclusive quality, you must
admit, adds to its value. Whether the advertising or the
distribution comes first is immaterial. It is certain that
the advertising and the wide distribution go together.

"Suppose two brands of soap of equal quality were
manufactured in a certain town and were sold at identically
the same price. In the beginning one would get just as much
for his money, whether he bought one brand or the other. One
manufacturer, by advertising and aggressive, selling
methods, places his goods in practically every drug and
grocery store in every city and village throughout the
country, so the folks who had become accustomed to this
manufacturer's brand were then in a position to secure their
favorite soap whether they happened to want it. The added
convenience gave them more for their money than formerly, or
more than in buying the unadvertised brand. The increased
output enabled the manufacturer to cut down his cost per
cake sufficiently to cover the advertising and still receive
the same returns from his investment, and so the purchaser
received more for his money in added convenience.

"Granting, even, that the advertising had to be charged up
to the customer and that each bar

131

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

actually cost half a cent more than the unadvertised brand,
even then it was certainly worth more than the extra cost
for the purchaser to be able to always buy the article to
which he was accustomed wherever he wanted it.

"When an advertised article is used with satisfaction in
Chicago, it is worth a lot to know that when one gets to
Minneapolis he can keep right on using the same identical
article. It is worth more than the advertising cost not to
be compelled to experiment with unfamiliar brands until he
finds one that exactly fills his requirements."

"UNIVERSAL ACCESSIBILITY" is BASED UPON

UNIFORMITY

A standard product is a product which conforms to certain
accepted specifications.

A uniform product is a product which is always identical in
make and material.

A product may be uniform no matter where or when bought, and
yet may conform to no accepted standard.

What PRINTERS' INK said concerning "universal accessibility"
applies to uniformity in products and not to standardization
in products.

The national advertising of a product generally results in
the making and selling of a uniform product, but not of a
standard product.

It is true that "universal accessibility" has 132

VERSUS PEOSPERITY

some value at least to traveling men even though all
consumers pay a higher price for a value which benefits only
a few of them.

But this value is insignificant if the fact is taken into
account that the national advertising of a product results
in the destruction of standardization in the product a very
serious injury to consumers.

The national advertiser strives to make his product
"different." If his product conformed to standard
specifications, he would render his copy-writers almost
wordless. The first step in planning copy for a national
advertising campaign is to discover some peculiarity in the
product which gives the copy-writer scope for his imagi-
nation.

It has become an axiom of national advertising, that if an
article has no exceptionally prominent qualities or values,
a scheme must be evolved to make an advertising point.

It may be that the scheme used to make an ordinary article
advertisable may have very little or nothing at all to do
with the merchandise itself. A peculiarity in the way it is
packed may be sufficient for the purpose.

As an instance of this sort of thing a writer in PRINTEBS'
INK cites Colgate's Tooth Cream. Many thousands of dollars
were spent in acquainting the public with the fact that this
dentifrice "Lies

133

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

flat on the brush like a ribbon." The opening of the tube
was so constructed that the cream came forth in that manner.
Other tooth creams on the market did not lie flat on the
brush. In this way the Colgate people, comments this writer,
had " really given this article a quality or an advantage,
which the product itself did not possess."

But the departure from the merchandise standard may have
even less reality than such as that in the instance cited.
About ten years ago the advertising manager of one of the
leading manufacturers of varnish in this country noticed
that other manufacturers, in advertisements of the same sort
of varnish, rarely mentioned the point of durability. So
they fastened on this one point which could be featured, and
made durability the theme of their national advertising
campaign. There wasn't a particle of difference in value be-
tween the grade of varnish advertised by this manufacturer
as exceptionally durable and similar varnishes advertised in
other ways by the other manufacturers. The, public was led
to believe that this particular varnish was more durable.
Thus it was lifted out of the class of standardized
varnishes, and the dealer was confronted with the problem of
adding a new line of varnish so as to meet the demand for
the " durable" brand or of discarding his present line and
substituting the

134

VERSUS PROSPERITY

branded line for the mere varnish which he had been selling
satisfactorily for years.

Retailers who had been in the habit of buying merchandise of
certain standards which their trade required, and with the
quality of which they were familiar, naturally resisted the
efforts of national advertisers in endeavoring to ignore the
question of the merit of the merchandise itself. Buying to
standard, each retailer had the opportunity to secure what
was in his judgment the best value on the market. It was
plain enough to him that if he substituted the trademarked
specialty for the standardized article which he had formerly
carried, he would be dependent upon the one manufacturer of
the branded product for his goods. If he "fell" for the
skilful salesmanship of the national advertisers, he would
become a mere delivery agent for the manufacturers and would
have to sell the advertised lines on terms fixed by
manufacturers of the advertised articles.

Paul E. Derrick, the creator of the Gold Dust Twins, the
benign old Quaker so long associated with Quaker Oats, and
the world famous good fellow, Johnnie Walker, tells how
manufacturers reasoned among themselves in determining to
create a demand for their merchandise which would force
recalcitrant retailers into line.

135

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

"They said to themselves, l There are so many million people
who need exactly what I am making. They are every day buying
something for exactly the same purpose as mine is intended.
Some of the things are just as good as mine, some are not so
good, and some are absolute rubbish. The public does not
know whose goods it is buying and it does not care, but if
it knew that it could not get anything better than mine, at
an equal price, and if it could identify mine, and was
entirely satisfied with them, I believe they would be asked
for at the shops/

"To market the goods, plans must be based upon efficient
advertising to the consumer to interest him in the goods ;
to induce his initial purchase, and by the same means, to
continue to stimulate his interest and purchase, and to
create an atmosphere of individuality for the goods offered.
He must be educated to think of 'A'S BISCUIT,' instead of
biscuit; of *x BREAD,' instead of bread; of 'B'S SHOES,'
instead of shoes; of *Y MATCHES,' instead of matches."

Mr. Derrick then unwittingly shows how any departure from
buying merchandise itself toward buying trademarks, labels
and brands completely destroys the selective process which
is the real merchant's true function in society.

"With the public 'pulling' on the retailer for goods, as a
result of the consumer advertising, it

136

VERSUS PROSPERITY

will require distinctly less 'push' on the part of (the
manufacturer's) salesman to secure a rapid and thorough
distribution of them, and a constantly lessening effort and
expense to keep them always accessible to the buying public.
Indeed, by no other means can sufficiently thorough and
widespread distribution be effected to ensure the permanence
of a large profitable business.

"Salesmanship of advertised, price-protected lines differs
essentially from salesmanship applied to unadvertised lines.
The modern traveller is a representative of identified and
advertised goods that represent the \* house/ not a
representative of a remote and phantom house that his
customer knows only as an address to which he makes
occasional remittance. If qualified, he is quick to
appreciate the tremendous selling force which he controls
when he takes out a well advertised line.

"He finds the dealer more interested in the story of the
advertising behind the goods than m mere discussion of the
goods, or the price.

"There are many opportunities offered the modern salesman to
show the retailer how he can hitch his interests to the big
advertising power with which the manufacturer is backing his
goods. It is the salesman's business to demonstrate to the
shopkeeper that it is to his interest to identify the shop
with the advertised line, to attach the

137

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

free advertising power to his business. \* \* \* One of the
economies of the advertising is that it relieves the
salesman from a great deal of the drudgery of selling. He
does not have continually to expound the value of the goods.
Nor does he have to parry and thrust with his customers on
the question of price. He can at once enter into intimate
relations with his customer. He should show him how to get
the biggest possible part of the profit from the advertising
which is being applied to the article. Thus relieved of
spending his time in gaining the attention of the dealer,
and bargaining and wrangling over prices and terms, etc., it
is possible for the salesman to do his business with greater
dispatch."

BUYING WITH QUALITY, PRICE AND VALUE SUBORDINATE

In the book from which this quotation is taken, Mr. Derrick
was pleading with British manufacturers to follow the trail
blazed by the national advertisers in this country.

According to this argument of a representative advocate of
national advertising, isn't it plain that national
advertising tends to make the retailer powerless to serve
the interests of his customers in so far as he could get
better values for them by eliminating from his buying ithe
discussion of quality, price and value?

138

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

The salesman who sells an advertised product need not be a
bona fide agent of the manufacturer, who is able to discuss
these vital matters with retailers. He is really a mere
order taker, who delivers himself of a set of prepared
arguments in advocacy of a cut and dried proposal.

The merchant, according to Paul E. Derrick, is compelled to
buy the advertised product from him. The merchant's
customers have been persuaded by advertising to demand the
advertised goods, and failure to supply them would merely
result in the customers going to another dealer for them. To
effect a sale, the salesman first tries to convince the
dealer that it is his duty to fill the demand for the goods
created by the advertising. And secondly, to persuade the
merchant that he can join in exploiting the consumer.

He tries to convince the dealer that he can increase his
profits by handling the advertised goods. But to overcome
the obvious fact that the gross profit of the dealer is less
on the advertised lines, he "puts over" the fallacy which we
will later expose, that because a nationally advertised
product can be sold more readily than an unadvertised
product, the selling costs of the dealer are reduced by
reasons of more rapid turnover.

All this is argued by the salesman to convince the merchant
that what should interest him is the

139

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

greater profit which he is told can be made on the handling
of the advertised goods, and not the values which he might
be able to offer his customers by careful study of the
merchandise itself and " bargaining and wrangling over
prices and terms. "

Now, the real work of a merchant is to assemble in his
store, literally from all over the world, attractive lines
of merchandise at attractive prices. If no abnormal factors
enter into distribution, he will, as methods of conducting
his business become more efficient, render a merchandising
service that tends to reduce, little by little, the price of
every article that he carries in his stock.

He cannot render this service if the question of price is a
subordinate factor in his buying.

Yet this is precisely what the national advertiser wants to
eliminate on the specious plea that the merchant should join
in exploiting the customer instead of in serving him.

As Mr. Derrick puts it: "If the (national) advertising is
being efficiently done, and the salesman properly exploits
it, the dealer, just the same as the consumer, has a
conviction of the enhanced value of the goods as compared
with competitive lines, and the whole transaction of selling
to the trade is to a great extent lifted out of price com-
petition."

140

VERSUS PROSPERITY

If I believed that under the present economic system in
which each factor in production and distribution looks out
for his own best interests; if I believed that with the
manufacturer, and wholesaler, and retailer, each striving
for maximum profits it would be possible to exploit the
consumer, I would turn socialist and join in trying to
overthrow the competitive system. I do not believe any such
thing. I know the reason that national advertisers exploit
the consumer is because the retailers who handle nationally
advertised goods refuse to look out for their own best
interests in the mistaken notion that they are giving their
customers what they want.

THE HUMAN EQUATION'

In an age of machinery and system, of corporations and of
scientific management, it is easy to forget that the two
parties to every sale are after all human beings. Economists
often overlook this fact. Business men, especially when they
are at the head of large organizations sometimes overlook
it. A real salesman never does.

Today the ultimate consumer is confronted on all sides with
methods of distribution which strive to minimize the human
equation. The consumer is unconscious of this fact. He
assumes that he purchases in accordance with the dictates of
his own will. In reality he purchases very much as

141

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

his desires have been moulded by national advertising.

Furthermore, national advertising has slowly but surely,
over a period of nearly half a century, managed to destroy
the consumer's original knowledge of merchandise itself. It
has educated him to rely, not upon his own judgment, nor
upon the recommendation of a merchant whom he knows and who
should be competent to guide him, but upon the statements
made by the national advertisers. Today, national
advertising makes the two parties to the purchase of
merchandise, the consumer who needs it and the manufacturer
who advertises it. Formerly the two parties were the
consumer who needed merchandise and the merchant who sold
it.

To determine whether the consumer is likely to have gained
as a result of this change, it is necessary to consider
whether the self-interest of the manufacturer or that of the
retailer is apt to parallel most nearly the self-interests
of the consumer. Since the merchant makes the contact with
the consumer it is natural for consumers to look to him to
protect their interest.

However, the retailer no longer has this function. He has
become a sort of " delivering agency" and responds to the
appeals of the consumer for this or that brand with little
knowledge of what the product really is.

142

VERSUS PROSPERITY

"The multiplying of the appeals to the consumer has
completely changed the retailer's position as a part of the
distribution system," says Paul Terry Cherington in
"Advertising as a Business Force." "Formerly, the selling of
the goods was his main service, and the selling of the goods
involved influencing the consumer as to the nature of his
wants, bargaining with him over the price, and then
convincing him that he was satisfied with his purchase.
Under the present conditions, however, largely as a result
of advertising, the nature of the consumer's wants is, at
least partially, predetermined. The price is more or less
completely set and satisfaction is guaranteed. The
retailer's service in the case of nationally advertised
goods thus become primarily a delivery service and not a
selling service."

This is the statement of a writer whose book is described by
PRINTERS' INK as "incomparably the best and most
authoritative work on the general subject of advertising
that has yet been issued."

It is of vital interest to every business man to know
whether the changing of " retailing M into "delivering" is
an actual improvement in the process of distribution.
National advertisers naturally assume that it is an
improvement. If it is an inprovement, then it should follow
that present methods of distribution should generally

143

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

be less costly than the methods of distribution which have
been superseded. And it should certainly follow that the
method of distribution through national advertising should
be less costly than the method of just selling the
merchandise to the retailer and trusting him to sell it to
the customer.

The question to be answered is: Has this change in. the
method of distribution tended to raise or lower the cost of
distribution!

This question has already been answered. Distribution costs
have risen, and the increased costs have been shifted in
part to the consumers and in part to the distributors.

Is there any good reason why retailers should lend their
assistance to a system of selling which injures them and
their customers for the benefit of a limited number of
manufacturers?

144

xn

WHAT THE NATIONAL ADVERTISER

DOES TO THE CONSUMER AND

DISTRIBUTOR

With the public persuaded by national advertisers that
advertised brands represent better "buys," and with the
retailer persuaded by high pressure specialty salesmen to
shut his eyes to merchandise values, what happens to the
consumer and distributor?

Is there any better answer than the answer to be found in
the pages of Paul E. Derrick's 800page argument in favor of
national advertising?

Speaking to manufacturers whom he is trying to convert to
the policy of national advertising, he shows them how they
can add to their profits.

In doing so, he cannot avoid demonstrating that what they
gain the distributors and the consumers lose.

He compares the division, between the distributors and the
manufacturers, of the money paid by the consumer for a cake
of advertised soap, with the division in the case of a cake
of unadvertised soap. In these two tables, 100 per

145

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

cent, represents the price which the consumer pays the
retailer for the soap.

The Unadvertised Soap

Per cent.

Retail selling price 100

Selling costs based upon retail selling price:

Per cent.

Retail charge , 33y 3

Wholesale charge

Manufacturers charge 5

Total selling cost . 55

Balance of retail selling price in hand for production and
manufacturer's profit 45

The Advertised Soap

Per cent.

Retail selling price 100

Selling costs based upon retail selling price:

Per cent.

Retail charge 25

Wholesale charge 7\^

Manufacturer's charge 5%) 15

Added for advertising 10%j

Total selling cost 47 %

Balance of retail selling price in hand for production and
manufacturer's profit

" These selling charges," explains Mr. Derrick, "are
exhibited throughout on the basis of the retail selling
price, and in the first example, based upon turnover, are
equivalent to 33% per cent.

146

VERSUS PROSPERITY

for the retailer, 25 per cent, for the wholesaler, and 10
per cent, for the manufacturers. In the latter example, the
selling charges are equivalent, upon turnover, to 25 per
cent, for the retailer, 10 per cent, for the wholesaler,
and, including advertising, over 22 per cent, for the
manufacturer. We, however, find that we have still in hand
52% per cent, for production and manufacturers ' profit, as
against 45 per cent, for the unadvertised article a positive
saving of 7% per cent, upon the total turn-over, figured on
final retail price.

"In other words, the economic advantage to the public is 7%
per cent, of its purchase price expressed in either better
value, or lower price, or extra profit to the manufacturer.
In any event, it is increased national wealth due to
increased economy and commercial efficiency."

It is almost incredible that a man of Mr.  Derrick's
experience in advertising should speak of this as of
economic advantage to the public. That it is no advantage to
any one but the manufacturers and the advertising industry
it is easy to demonstrate by giving this demonstration an
"acid test."

Instead of comparing two hypothetical soaps in percentages
only, I have taken two actual soaps, one of which is
advertised, and the other unadvertised. Both are the
products of reputable

147

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

houses. They are intended for the same use in the laundry.
There is no difference between the claims made by the two
makers for the qualities of their products. So far as I can
tell, there is no substantial difference between them.

Now, if the actual amounts of money involved in the selling
of these two soaps be calculated in accordance with
Mr. Derrick's formulas, this is how each factor in the sale
would share in the consumer's money:

The Unadvertised Soap

Cents.

Retail selling price, 100 per cent 6.875

Selling costs based upon retail prices:

Retail charge, 33% per cent 2.291%

Wholesale charge, 16% per cent 1.145%

Manufacturer's charge, 5 per cent 0.343%

Total selling cost, 55 per cent 3.78125

Balance of retail selling price in hand for production and

manufacturer's profit 45 per cent 3.09375

The Advertised Soap

Retail selling price, 100 per cent 12

Selling costs based upon retail selling price:

Retail charge, 25 per cent 3

Wholesale charge, 7% per cent 0.9

Manufacturer's charge and national advertising 15 per cent
1.8

Total selling cost, 47\^ per cent 5.7

Balance of retail selling price in hand for production and
manufacturer's profit, 57% per cent 6.3\*

148

VERSUS PROSPERITY

These two tables show that every time the advertised article
is bought by a consumer that he pays nearly twice as much
for it as he would for the unadvertised article. The
consumer pays 5% cents more for the advertised soap; the
retailer gets 25 per cent, less on his turnover; the whole-
saler loses 45 per cent, on his turnover. But the
manufacturer, after deducting selling and advertising costs
(which instead of being less, as Mr. Derrick assumes, are
nearly six times, as much), gets more than twice as much for
his caJce of soap as does the manufacturer of the unad-
vertised article.

Obviously, the additional price which the national
advertising enables the manufacturer to

THE UNADVEBTISED SOAP THE ADVERTISED SOAP

The two circles show the relative amounts spent for the two
articles by the consumer. The large black areas show the
amounts received by the manufacturer for production cost and
profit; the small black areas their expenditures for selling
and advertising. The white areas represent the shares of the
retailers and wholesalers, and how their shares are reduced
in order to make room for advertising and the manufacturers'
additional profits.

149

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

get, doesn't, as Mr. Derrick suggests, give the public a
better value.

Isn't the advocate of national advertising rather mistaken,
to say the least, in describing the process as an addition
to the national wealth (of course, he means the national
income, but it would be too unkind to criticize the economic
terminology of the average advertising man), when it is
really a method of transferring wealth from the consumer,
the retailer and the wholesaler, to the manufacturer and the
advertising industries which he supports?

At every step of the movement of the nationally advertised
soap from the manufacturer to the consumer's laundry,
somebody loses, solely in order to contribute to the support
of the national advertising industry and to enable a few
fortunate and successful manufacturers to double, treble and
quadruple their profits.

150

XIII

CONSUMER DEMAND AND CONSUMER ACCEPTANCE

By what arguments have the national advertisers succeeded in
persuading the great majority of wholesalers and retailers
that they should not merely handle, but actually "push"
their products?

Their first reliances was upon the creation through their
advertising of " consumer demand " for their products. When
consumer demand became strong enough, it literally compelled
dealers to stock and handle their goods.

The manufacturer who. relies principally upon his ability to
create consumer demand to secure distribution for his
product has to take extraordinary pains with his
advertising. It is actually of greater importance to him
than any mere question of production. It must be so
persuasive, so persistent, and fix the superiority of his
brand so firmly in the minds of consumers that they will
shop around until they find a dealer who handles it.
Incidentally, the conviction must be implanted that the
retailer who refuses to handle it, who

151

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

sells something 'similar which he says "is just as good" is
doing so for an ulterior motive the desire to make a larger
profit at the expense of the consumer.

.With certain kinds of products, national advertisers have
been extraordinarily successful in creating consumer demand.
This is notably true of drug, toilet, and food specialties.
In some other lines of merchandise it is doubtful whether
any advertiser has ever or will ever be able to Create real
consumer demand. In lines where style, pattern, color, or
novelty enter largely into the consideration of a purchase
by the consumer, advertisers find it almost impossible to
establish consumer demand.

But, in spite of many important exceptions, it is,
nevertheless, a fact that with national advertising it is
possible to create consumer demand sufficient to literally
force retailers to stock the product.

There are outstanding advertising successes built entirely
and exclusively upon this system of selling.

THE CUTICURA SYSTEM

A notable one is that which made a fortune, according to
records, of \$9,133,748 for the late George R. White, the
founder of the Cuticura Soap business forty-five years ago.
An article in

152

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

the EDITOR AND PUBLISHER, describing how Mr.  White
established his business was entitled, "Millions for
Advertising, Not a Cent for Salesman of Cuticura. Newspapers
Brought Product to People and Eetailers Had to Carry It or
Lose Sales."

Mr. White 's system was to do without salesmen. Even he
himself never went out in the trade after orders. Instead,
he devoted great care to his advertising. When he wanted to
invade new teritory, he set his advertising going.

Today the Cuticura appropriation is well above \$1,000,000
annually, which puts it with the first twenty-five or so in
point of amount of expenditure. Approximately six hundred
daily newspapers are utilized in the United States, in
addition to twenty-five magazines and many farm papers and
country weeklies, besides Indian, Chinese, South African,
Australian, British, and other foreign mediums.

His appropriation in 1883 was \$132,000, a giant amount in
those days and not a small one even today. His sales that
year were \$412,000. Since he traveled no men, and his
orders came to him without any other expense than his
advertising to consumers, this was his total selling
expense. Yet it was over 32 per cent.

This is a figure which would bankrupt the ordinary
manufacturer, but which means nothing to

153

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

national advertisers who can make the consumer pay and pay
and pay.

Here is a case, sufficient to convince the most practical
and the most skeptical that consumer demand is no fiction.

Yet it remains true that in most lines it is incredibly easy
for the merchant to completely nulify the efforts of the
national advertiser. The retailer holds the strategic
position. He has ultimate contact with the public, and in
most cases sufficient influence with his customers to make
or break any particular sale of an advertised product.
Unless the national advertiser has a habit forming article,
which is the case with many food and drug products, it is
easy for the retailer who is familiar with the merchandise
he handles and who is a good salesman, to sell the consumer
what he has already in stock similar to the nationally
advertised product called for.

Today, the whole field of distribution is so confounded
that, with the exception of the great retail institutions,
retailers no longer make a real effort to sell what in their
best judgment are the best values they have stocked or might
secure for their customers. They follow the path of least
resistance. Many of them have been made to feel that there
is something unethical in what national advertisers call "
substitution. "

154

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

SUBSTITUTION

Substitution, according to national advertisers, is the
practice of selling to the consumer who has asked for a
branded article some other article which the dealer prefers
to sell.

National advertisers generally charge that the retailer who
substitutes, sells inferior products in order to secure
higher profits.

They assume a sort of moral title to the customers' business
in spite of the fact that their claim to it rests solely
upon their own efforts to make sales for themselves. They
necessarily deny the retailer the moral right to make any
selling effort on merchandise of the retailer's own
selection in any case where they have succeeded in creating
in a customer an interest in their particular brand.

If this be conceded them, it logically follows that a
retailer must stock every advertised brand for which he may
have calls.

As a matter of fact, the whole propaganda concerning
substitution is based upon subtle falsehoods.

It is not the retailer who tries to sell what he has in
stock who is the original substituter.

Except with absolutely new products, of which there are very
few, it is the national advertiser who first seeks to
substitute.

155

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

The retailer who serves his customers carries a stock
selected to meet their needs and desires.

The national advertisers address his customers and try to
persuade them to demand that the retailer furnish them each
manufacturer's particular (brand. They then go to the
retailer, and on the strength of this artificially created
demand, ask him to substitute their branded articles for the
merchandise which he had been previously handling. Of
course, their salesmen do not put it so nakedly. They do not
tell the retailer to discontinue the sale of the i original
merchandise. They merely persuade him to add the branded
line to his stock. Time does the rest.

This process of substituting for the grades of merchandise
previously carried by the merchant their own branded lines,
generally at higher prices, they tell the world is in the
interest of the consumer. They thus pose as quasi-philan-
thropists and appear anxious to protect the public against
the greed of the retailer.

Yet, after all, they are primarily in business for the sake
of earning profits.

So are the retailers.

The motives which actuate both are the same. Isn't it
somewhat ludicrous for us to assume that the advertisers are
animated by a virtuous desire to serve the consumers, while
the retailers have only a vicious desire to exploit the
consumer?

156

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

Neither from the standpoint of ethics nor of economics is
there the slightest foundation for the criticism of what
they call " substitution. "

If the advertiser's effort to substitute his branded product
for the goods originally sold by the retailer is good in
morals and in business, then the retailer's effort to sell
what he has been carrying in preference to substituting the
advertised line is just as good morals and business.

In most lines it is a sheer impossibility for a retailer to
carry even a few of the most prominently of the advertised
brands. The merchant therefore has to substitute. When he
has none but advertised brands in stock, is he guilty of
substituting if he tries to sell the brands he has in stock
to the consumer who has asked him for one which he does not
carry 1? I presume, in such a case, the national advertisers
would want him to turn the customer out of his store and
over to retailer who carries the brand asked for.

The matter thus reduces itself to an absurdity.

There is another point of view from which it is well to
consider the matter.

The merchant who practices what is called substitution, and
all do that in order that they may survive, has nothing to
apologize for to any one. If any apologies are in order, the
men who started the trouble should apologize.

Substitution, if it be an evil, is one brought into 157

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

existance not lay the cupidity of retailers, but by the
cupidity of national advertisers.

Were the manufacturer who undertakes national advertising to
truthfully explain himself, he could only plead that he is
in business to earn profits; that he has undertaken national
advertising because he thought that he could make larger
profits in that way.

Unless he can show retailers that stocking his advertised
product and substituting it for the product they had been
carrying would result in a better value for their customers,
or a greater profit for themselves, the advertiser doesn't
come to the retailers with clean hands.

He engages in a game of substituting to make profits for
himself, and denies the fairness of retailers doing
precisely the same thing and for the same reason.

CONSUMEB ACCEPTANCE

In recent years, national advertisers who have come to
appreciate the formidable position of the retailer who
refuses to be cowed by threats of "consumer demand" or
fooled by talk about "substitution," have made "consumer
acceptance" the goal of their advertising effort.

By consumer acceptance they mean the creation in the mind of
the consumer of a conviction of the superiority of the
advertised article sufficient to

158

VERSUS PROSPERITY

make him prefer the product when it is shown to him by a
retailer.

It is entirely possible with effective national ad-
vertising to create such a conviction in the minds of
consumers, even when the quality of the advertised product
is no better than others on the market. It is even possible
to create such a conviction despite the fact that it may be
higher in price.

Whether the consumer " demands " the product or whether he
merely " accepts " the product, does not alter the fact that
the retailer has to determine whether it is wise for him to
substitute the advertised brand for the merchandise he pre-
viously carried.

Unless the new product enables the retailer to offer a
better value to his customers, or tooffer them the same
value while giving him a better profit, I can see no earthly
reason for any retailer stocking it. Stocking it without
some good reason would simply add to the size and variety of
his stock, or make a change in his lines which would leave
odds and ends of the original line to be disposed of at a
sacrifice.

INTRODUCING THE TURN-OVER AUGUMENT

But the national advertisers have anticipated the certainty
that the retailer would come to this conclusion. And for the
purpose of overcoming

159

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

it, they have perfected what is by far the most ingenious
half-truth that national advertising has so far sponsored.

Perhaps the best way of showing how the proponents of
national advertising mingle truths and half-truths when
presenting this argument is in their own words. The
following is an excerpt from an article entitled "What Is
Profit V 9 which appeared in the CINCINNATI POST"Market
Master," a trade paper published for the purpose of inducing
retailers to handle the products nationally advertised in
the CINCINNATI POST:

"Profit does not depend entirely on what it costs to get
merchandise on the shelves. It depends quite as much on the
cost of getting merchandise off the shelves.

"A package that sticks for six months must pay its share of
rent and insurance and interests and management and clerk
hire and other overhead for six months.

"The package that comes in today and goes out tomorrow has
very little overhead to carry.

"What does it profit a merchant to save 5 per cent, on
purchase price and then pay 10 per cent, on carrying charges
for stuff that people do not know about and do not want and
will not buy I The merchant who buys things because they are
cheap, but have no reputation, soon builds him-

160

VERSUS PROSPERITY

self a reputation for selling things at a low price because
they are cheap.

" Every package a merchant sells advertises his store.
Standard, trademarked, advertised merchandise, carries a
quality advertisement of the store into the homes of the
purchasers.

"Unknown merchandise, sometimes good and sometimes poor,
advertises the element of uncertainty in connection with
purchases at the store which sends them out.

"When advertised merchandise with known reputation and
certain quality and established value is in competition with
unknown goods, the merchant should figure the cost of
getting each one on and off the shelf.

"Don't stop with the cost of putting it on the shelf. Don't
forget that you wrap your own reputation up with each
package you send out."

If we overlook, for the moment, the reflections upon the
merchant's ability to buy good merchandise, the most
striking admission of the writer of this little preachment
is that the merchant in buying the nationally advertised
product is apt to have to content himself with a smaller
percentage of profit. He attempts to justify the smaller
percentage by two arguments: First, that it costs the
merchant less to move the nationally advertised goods off
the shelf, and second,

161

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

that because it costs him less, the overhead chargeable
against his sales of the product is reduced. We shall see
that both of these arguments cannot stand examination.

162

XIV

THE FALLACY OF THE TURN-OVER ARGUMENT

Turn-over is a word which is applied to the ratio of stock
carried and the volume of sales.

If the stock carried is \$10,000, and the volume of sales in
a year is \$10,000, the stock turns over once a year.

If the stock carried is \$10,000, and the volume of sales is
\$50,000 a year, the stock turns over five times a year.

As some of the items in the cost of doing business are
fixed, it is obvious that the more rapid a store's
turn-over, the greater is the store's profit.

Upon this truism the national advertisers have developed the
famous turn-over argument.

It appears in a myriad of varying forms. In the quotation in
the preceding chapter this argument was used for the purpose
of proving to retailers that the nationally advertised
merchandise can be sold at a lower cost than the
undavertised merchandise. Because of its importance, and the
many different forms in which it is presented, re-

163

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

ducing the turn-over argument to a syllogism will make it
easy to hereafter recognize it, no matter what the form in
which it may appear.

1.  The turn-over on a nationally advertised article is more
    rapid than the turn-over on a similar unadvertised
    article.

2.  The stock of merchandise in a store handling only
    nationally advertised merchandise would have a turn-over
    similar to that on nationally advertised articles.

3.  Therefore, a stock of merchandise consisting of
    nationally advertised articles would turn over more
    rapidly than a stock of unadvertised goods.

Now, there are only three things wrong with this argument:
It is incorrect in premise; it is incorrect in analogy, and
finally, it is incorrect in conclusion.

THE COMMUNITY TURK-OVER

It has already been shown that the possible volume of sales
of all the retailers in the country is limited to the
earnings of the consumers of the nation.

What is true of the country as a whole is true of the
average community in the nation.

The possible volume of sales of all the merchants in any
community is limited by the total earnings of the consumers
of the community. The possible turn-over of their stocks is
the ratio

164

VERSUS PROSPERITY

between their possible sales and the stocks they carry.

There are only two ways in which the merchants of that town
might speed their turn-overs: One is by increasing the
earnings of the consumers who buy from them, and the other
is by reducing the stocks of merchandise which they carry.
There are no other ways. All schemes or devices for
apparently lifting themselves by their own bootstraps are
certain to prove, upon careful examination, a mere shifting
about of the possible sales.

Now, if all the merchants in that community substituted
nationally advertised goods for the stocks of unadvertised
goods which they had previously carried, and did not
decrease the size of their stocks, turn-over would not be
changed a particle the only thing that would have been
changed is their margin of profit.

They would make less on the same volume of sales. j \|m

What they would have lost, the national advertisers would
have gained.

It is therefore apparent that changing from an unadvertised
to a nationally advertised basis will not change the total
turn-over of our merchants a particle.

Total turn-over of course, can be improved. For instance, it
may be changed in a community

165

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

by increased sales following a raise in wages. But the
speeding of turn-over by increasing the earnings of the
public is something beyond the control of the national
advertisers. Or total turn-over can be improved by more
efficient merchandising, which would tend to reduce the
stocks which the merchant carried.

But total turn-over cannot be improved by the general
substitution of nationally advertised goods for unadvertised
goods.

INDIVIDUAL TURN-OVER

It is now necessary to consider whether the carrying of
nationally advertised products helps a retailer to turn over
his stock more rapidly by enabling him to secure some of the
sales which otherwise would go to his competitors.

There are only two ways in which an individual merchant can
increase the volume of his sales: One is by inducing his
customers to buy more of the kind of merchandise he is
selling than they ordinarily do to buy shoes instead of dry
goods and the other is by getting away some of the trade of
the customers of other merchants getting the public to buy
shoes of him instead of other shoe dealers.

The first method has decided limitations. The average
consumer's budget covers proportionate expenditures for
food, clothing and shelter. He

166

VEESUS PROSPERITY

can shift his expenditures about to only a limited extent.
It he is induced to overbuy on food at one time, he will
underbuy on food until the surplus of food has been
consumed. In the same way, if he " splurges " on clothing at
one time, he is apt to be forced to economize on clothing
until he has caught up with the necessary purchases for
other items in his budget. It is remarkable how powerfully
the conditions of the average man's life determine what
amounts he spends for the various items which comprise his
budget.

But as to increasing sales by inducing the public to buy of
him instead of other merchants there are no such decided
limitations.

The more enterprising merchant can take away customers from
his competitors.

The question is, does the carrying of nationally advertised
articles, as distinguished from unadvertised articles, help
him do this without necesarily increasing the stocks he
carries?

This question has only to be asked to make it plain that it
cannot do so if all the merchants in the town can carry the
same advertised articles.

If all the grocers in the town can carry Ivory Soap, how can
any one of them take customers away from the other merely by
carrying this soap? Even if the most enterprising grocer
puts in the Ivory Soap before the other grocers put

167

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

it in stock, before lie can permanently secure the trade of
their customers they will have followed his example and
stocked the same advertised soap.

What happens, however, in the case of the clothier let us
say, who puts in a nationally advertised line of clothes for
which he has the exclusive agency! Does this enable him to
take customers away from his competitors?

If, for the sake of argument, we concede that there is
consumer demand or consumer acceptance which makes it easier
to sell the nationally advertised clothes than the
unadvertised clothes, and one merchant in a town stocks such
clothes and uses them to get business away from the other
merchants aren't the other merchants naturally going to
follow suit and put in other lines of advertised clothes?

Wouldn't the fact that the advertised line of clothes took
business away from the enterprising merchant's competitors,
literally force them to put in some similar line to hold
their trade? Wouldn't the net effect of all this simply be
that each of the clothing merchants of the town would have
an " exclusive" advertised line, each would have retained
their relative share of the business, while all would have
lost because they had shifted from lines of merchandise
where they controlled their margins of profit, to lines of
merchandise

168

VERSUS PROSPERITY

where the manufacturers determined what profits they should
make?

It is now obvious that the mere adding of a line of
advertised goods, even if we concede consumer acceptance,
doesn't, in the long run, increase the turn-over of a
merchant. If adding advertised products is followed by an
increase in turn-over, it will be found in most cases that
the increases is due to the efforts put forth by the
merchant rather than the demand created by the national
advertisers.

Any effort which a retailer puts back of his nationally
advertised lines to take trade from his competitors, if put
into selling products carrying only his own recommendation,
would be just as certain to get the business.

MORE ADVERTISED LINES MORE STOCK

As against the doubtful chances of increasing his sales by
taking customers away from competitors merely on the
strength of his stock of advertised merchandise, is the
certainty that the greater the number of advertised lines he
carries, the larger his stock must be.

A grocer, for instance, could satisfy most of his customers
\* requirements for coffee by carrying two, or at the most
three, grades. But if he attempts to carry all the leading
advertised brands (regarding the grade of which he knows

169

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

nothing), he would have to carry from ten to fifteen.

The vast number of advertised brands now on the market has
served to do only one thing: make it more difficult for the
retailer to " carry on." He frequently carries two or three
times the number of lines of merchandise really necessary,
all of substantially the same grade, simply because his
customers have been taught by national advertisers to ask
for the brands and not for the merchandise.

It is up to him to say whether he shall merchandise what he
sells: or whether he shall be a sort of animated delivery
service for national advertisers.

We conceded, for the sake of argument, while discussing
exclusive agencies for advertised lines, that national
advertisers might create increased sales for retailers
handling their brands at the expense of other retailers. The
concession was made only in order to make it doubly plain
that it was a temporary advantage, because the other
merchants would be certain to retaliate in kind.

In the long run, no matter how much advertising a
manufacturer may do, no matter how much consumer demand he
may create for his particular trademark or brand, his brand
will not increase the turn-over of the average merchant.

170

VERSUS PROSPERITY

LOWER PROFITS CERTAIN: INCREASED SALES UNCERTAIN

Let us consider the following case: A manufacturer places
upon the market a new line of hosiery and puts behind it an
extremely clever and effective advertising campaign. His
salesman goes to a retailer with the line and " sells " him
the line on the strength of the demand which the national
advertising will create for the brand. He makes a very
persuasive argument, the substance of which is that while
the retailer will not make as high a profit on the line, his
hosiery sales will increase so largely that net profit will
be larger than with his present line of hosiery.

The retailer puts in the new line, which he has been
convinced will speed up his turn-over of hosiery, because
consumer demand will make it possible to sell more of the
branded product than he had previously been selling of his
unadvertised lines. In spite of the fact that his gross
margin is smaller, he figures he will gain in the long run.

On the face of it, the manufacturer's salesman is right, and
the retailer would be foolish to turn down the proposition.

But the merchant does not sell to mere abstractions. He
sells to human beings. His total sales cannot be considered
a series of unrelated accidents. They are made to his
customers. The unit of selling is really not the actual sale
so

171

NATIONAL ADVEBTISING

much as the customer. His total sales are really his average
sales to each of his customers. If the retailer's sales are
\$100,000 per year, and he has 1,000 customers, then his
average sale to each customer is \$100.

Whether the consumer spends more or less than this sum for
furnishings will depend upon his income. The retailer has no
control over that. Neither has the manufacturer. And as to
the proportionate share of his income which the consumer
devotes to any particular class of purchases, that is
determined by a great variety of influences, of which
national advertising is one of the least, because the
advertisers of food tend to offset the advertisers of
clothing, thus cancelling each other's efforts to a large
degree.

To test the national advertiser's claims about the new line
of hosiery, the retailer would have to determine three
things.

First, whether the manufacturer's advertising would induce
his customers to increase their average purchases of hosiery
; to spend \$105 per year for furnishings instead of only
\$100.

Second, whether it would induce the other merchant's
customers to buy the advertised hosiery from him (but
without his losing some of his customers to the other
fellow).

Third, whether the possible increased sales from these two
sources would increase his turn-

172

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

over sufficiently to offset the lower margin of profit on
the advertised line.

Unless the new line of hose is inferior to the old, the
customer is not going to consume more hosiery in the course
of a year. He will not have to replace his hosiery more
frequently, let us hope, because he wears an advertised
brand. The utmost that the advertising might do is to induce
the customer to shift his expenditures from other articles
to more expensive hosiery. What the retailer might gain on
hosiery, he might lose on shirts. And as for a shift from
food, let us say, to furnishings, the retailer must never
for a moment forget that at the very time that the hosiery
salesman is telling him something to that effect, the
nationally advertised food salesman is telling the same sort
of story to grocers.

If the line of advertised hose which the retailer puts in
were the only advertised line on the market, then he might
hope to secure a substantial part of the other fellow's
business. But as a matter of fact, the other fellow is being
at the same time persuaded by some ottier manufacturer that
he can get some of the first retailer's business by putting
in another line of nationally advertised hose, and the net
result is a mere shifting of business, with both retailers
losing by the change.

It is true that if the new line is indisputably 173

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

better merchandise, he will get business from the other
fellow, but then he gets it because he offers a better
value, and not because he offers the advertised hosiery.

If, in spite of these considerations, the retailer is able
to answer these two questions affirmatively, and he figures
that placing in the new line would increase sales, he has
yet to determine whether he can secure these increased sales
without carrying a larger stock of hosiery. Unless he can
increase sales while holding his stock to its original size,
his turn-over is not improved a particle.

He might be able to hold down his stock if he abandons his
present line and replaces it with the advertised line
exclusively. But in many lines retailers cannot do that.
They may have to carry several grades to satisfy their
trade. Adding a new line, then, is apt to mean duplicating
some of the grades which he already has in stock, and thus
increase the stock, instead of reducing it.

174

THE RETAILER: SLOT-MACHINE OR MERCHANT!

A recent advertisement of N. W. Ayer & Company, of
Philadelphia, probably the largest advertising agency in the
country, may very conveniently serve as a text or
illustriation to the theme I am now trying to develop. The
advertisement was entitled "Without Destination," and was
Complete as follows:

' EVery day, from every city in the land, thousands of
dollars ' worth of merchandise is shipped without
destination. True, the shipping tags and packing boxes bear
the names and addresses of consignees. True, in places near
and far, men in warehouses will receive them; merchants will
put the goods upon their shelves. But these are not
destinations. These are merely junctions. Merchandise is not
made for wholesalers or retailers. It is not fashioned to
grow old in storerooms or catch dust on shelves. Yet how
many makers ship their merchandise to these junctions and
then forget it ignoring the fact that its journey is not yet
completed failing to provide for it a wait-

175

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

ing destination in the homes and business places of those
who use it. They seem to think, these makers, that when
their salesmen take an order from a wholesaler or retailer
the merchandise is sold. They leave it to shift for itself
in the crowded junctions of trade to find its way, if it
can, into the hands of casual buyers who do not seek it, and
to whom its quality means nothing. But these are not the
leaders of today and their method is the method of the past.
Fewer and fewer they become harder and harder grows the
road. Their merchandise, lost in the maze at the junctions,
gives way to products that know where they are going
advertised products whose market is assured. "

Is what N. W. Ayer & Company says true!

Can it be truthfully said that when a wholesaler or retailer
orders merchandise from a manufacturer, obligates himself to
pay for it, and undertakes to sell enough of it to pay for
it, that the manufacturer has not sold the merchandise nor
the distributor bought it? Of course not.

The implication that wholesalers or retailers buy
merchandise in order to have it 4 ' grow old in storerooms
or catch dust on shelves " is downright funny. And the utter
lack of faith in the capacity of good merchandise "to shift
for itself," or in the judgment of consumers "to whom its
quality means nothing/' is noteworthy.

176

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

But the advertisement reveals a more surprising lack of
appreciation of the importance of 4 ' merchandising. ' '

Merchandising has been defined by Arthur Freeman, former
advertising manager for Gimbel Brothers and E. H. Macy &
Co., Inc., New York City, as "The art and science of so
co-ordinating the production and selection of goods or
services with their sale and distribution as to result in
maximum service to the patron and consequent just profit to
the merchandiser."

It is plain that one of the foremost exponents of national
advertising utterly denies to the retailer the creative
function described by Mr.  Freeman.

For if the retailer is a mere junction, a mere consignee in
a transaction between the advertiser and the consumer, it is
ridiculous to assume that he should determine the selection
of the merchandise by his public, much less influence the
making of the merchandise itself.

These pretensions of the advocates of national advertising
are certainly damaging to the pride of merchants. But they
have much more serious consequence.

As we have seen, national advertising makes it possible for
the manufacturer to charge "as much as the traffic will
bear."

Hence, the retailer has to pass higher prices 177

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

On to the public, and the public visits its resentment upon
him.

The policy best adapted to correct these conditions, and to
correct them in a natural manner without unbusinesslike
dogmatism, is a reassertion of the supreme importance of the
merchandise itself.

To the extent to which the retailer surrenders to the
national advertiser the merchandising of his stock, to that
extent he must shut his eyes to the merchandise which he
handles. It is an unfortunate fact that many retailers have
grown to accept this as an inevitable and unchangeable state
of affairs. The national advertisers are literally making
over retailers into the sort of vending machines necessary
to their method of distribution.

These retailers are to a degree the retailers of the
present. But to survive the periods of hard times, to be the
retailers of the future, they will have to be more than "
consignees. " They will have to be tradesmen who know
merchandise.

A DANIEL COMES TO JUDGMENT

Before turning from our discussion of the consequences of
national advertising as it affects the retailer,
corroboration of the views here set forth comes from an
unexpected source. PRINTERS'

178

VERSUS PROSPERITY

INK for January 11, 1923, is like a Daniel come to judgment.

This issue contains an article "By a Smalltown Storekeeper'
7 entitled"Why Traveling Salesmen Call Me a Crank. " The
article is written in the first person and tells the story
of a storekeeper who experiences a complete change of heart
when he suddenly appreciates the danger of running a
business with gross annual sales of \$78,000 and a stock of
more than \$50,000 at inventory time.

This man's store was a small-town department store or
"general merchandise store" and he carried everything from a
cream separator to leather belts, from corsets to canned
milk, and from shaving cream to candy. Everything was going
along happily until he began to find it more and more
difficult to get the money to meet current bills. In spite
of a fine big trade, good collections, low expenses, he
found it difficult to keep his head above water.

About ten years ago a quarrel with a salesman who criticised
his methods of doing business opened his eyes.

As he says, in his own words: "I found I had four makes of
cream separators, eleven brands of shaving cream in tubes,
four varieties of dress gloves, six makes of men's suits,
seven kinds of

179

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

toothpaste, six brands of automobile tires. I had candy from
five different concerns, cakes and crackers from four, six
brands of canned salmon, and five kinds of 'best' coffee,
and I had six different kinds of canned beans and seven
brands of tomato catsup. "

This not uncommon condition in retail stores, this man
attributed to the fact that he had been a "good scout" with
the boys on the road. His diagnosis of his trouble was from
a business standpoint, of course, superficial. From a psy-
chological standpoint, as a diagnosis of his own weakness,
it was shrewd and correct. But had he been at all familiar
with the economic tendency which we have been studying in
this book, he would have known that the multiplicity of
salesmen who called upon him, and the variety of brands
which they convinced him he ought to carry, was due
primarily to the growth of national advertising. The manner
in which he corrected his trouble shows that, while he did
not see beyond the symptoms of the disease to the cause of
the disease itself, he happily chanced upon a remedy jfor
his troubles.

HIS NEW VIEWPOINT: SELLING INSTEAD OF DELIVERING

After a sale which cleaned out his stock of variegated
brands, he adopted a policy of selling

180

VERSUS PROSPERITY

a single brand of his selection in each line instead of
carrying and distributing the various brands his customers
had been led to demand. He says, "Probably the most
important thing I learned, when I finished cutting down my
stock, was that while it is all well enough to cut down to
one brand each of evaporated milk, and of condensed milk,
and one or two kinds of pork and beans, and one make of
shoes, and one kind of cream separator, the man who handles
seven kinds of evaporated milk hands out milk, or pork and
beans, while the man who handles one brand of evaporated
milk or beans, sells them.

"For instance, I found that my annual sales of evaporated
milk were about a hundred cases. Right at that moment I had
on hand six different brands for a total of forty-eight
cases. I was down for less than two turn-overs a year. Yet
one good brand would serve my purpose and I could buy it
every week, if necessary, and make thirty or forty
turn-overs a year, with ten or twelve or at the most
twenty-five dollars tied up instead of more than two
hundred."

Now note the method he adopts to sell the one brand he
decides the best he can offer his customers nothing less
than our old friend " substitution " under the pseudonym of
"switching."

"When I used to handle seven varieties of evaporated milk,"
he says, "a customer could

181

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

say, \*A can of milk' or she could say 'A Can of Blank's
Milk," and I could supply her. Now she may ask for a brand
of milk which I do not have. There is where selling comes
in. That was the most important lesson I had to learn. It
was especially Jiard with coffee. It is easy to switch a
customer in milk or beans or men's clothes or gloves, but
coffee is the acid test. I had picked out the best selling
brand that I had and decided to get behind it hard, but
before a week was over, I had to put in a hurry-up call for
the salesman.

" 'Say, this theory of selling one kind of coffee is fine
and I wish I could do it. Maybe you can, but I can't. Can
you show me how it is done, or do I have to put in a brand
to suit Mrs. Jones and another brand to suit Mrs. Smith and
so on?'

"I had to learn a lot of things about coffee in general and
this line in particular, but when we got all through the
session that evening, my clerks and I were convinced that
this particular brand of coffee was the only one we could
sell with a clear conscience. We rigged up a percolator and
made coffee every day. We told women why we were handling
just one line and why they should buy that one line.
Possibly we lost a few customers, but I know of many we
gained. We could talk coffee better than any merchant in
competition with us. We could teach a woman how

182

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

to make better coffee with our brand than she had made
before. We turned our coffee over so rapidly that it was
fresher and better than any they were used to getting in a
small town. Our account was so valuable to the coffee house
that we could and did get the best of service and ad-
vantage in buying. Its salesman did not push his brand so
hard in other stores and gradually we had almost the
exclusive agency with a wonderful coffee business built up
for us. We not only had a big coffee trade, with turnover
and profits, and people swearing that ' there is only one
place in town to buy coffee,' but we had learned how to sell
coffee. \>r

What this policy means in the case of coffee, it means in
the case of any kind of merchandise which is sold in a
retail store. In the case of this merchant, it stopped with
his selling of one brand. It was not carried to its logical
end.

Logically, a real merchant should refuse to handle the
nationally advertised products unless he cannot avoid it.

If a merchant once adopts the policy of selling the customer
what he has decided as the best value he can offer his
trade, instead of "handing across the counter what people
want," he himself, rather than the owner of the brand, is
entitled to the full benefit of the "good-will" created by
the merchandise he sells. There is

183

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

absolutely no reason why he should create this good-will for
a manufacturer unless the manufacturer gives him a
substantial reason for doing so. Now the national
advertising manufacturer cannot, in the very nature of
things, do that. He spends a fortune in trying to make
people demand his particular brand from retailers, and in
convincing retailers that they should give the people the
brand for which they have been persuaded to ask. What he
expends for national advertising every year, and his
interests and profits upon his entire investment in " good-
will, " has to come out of the retailer or consumer, or
both.

In this respect, the policy of the large department stores
of the country is absolutely logical. A New York store once
purchased a special lot of woman's coats and suits from a
manufacturer whose label was nationally advertised. The man-
ufacturer congratulated himself on " having broken into New
York." Imagine his dismay when he discovered that these
garments were put on sale but with all his nationally
advertised labels removed! When a representative of the
manufacturer called upon the buyer of the department for an
explanation, it was given very briefly: "We take the
responsibility for selling the garments. Why should we turn
our department into a delivery agency for your factory f"

184

VERSUS PROSPERITY

DELIVERY AGENTS SHOULD GIVE WAY TO THE MERCHANTS: CLERKS
GIVE WAY TO SALESMEN

Under modern conditions it is possible for a man to go into
retailing with almost nothing in the way of real knowledge
of the merchandise he hands out. 'Such a retailer becomes a
sort of delivery agent for the manufacturers of advertised
products. But if enough merchants assert themselves, these
retailers cannot survive. They will give way to the
merchants, just as clerks gave way to salesmen in the case
of the storekeeper whom we have been quoting. As he says:

"Another thing this move did was to change the character of
my clerks to a very great extent. A new kind of a clerk has
developed. The vacantfaced individual who handed out this
and that has had to disappear. I must have clerks who can
sell my brand of milk because they can show a customer why
it is to her advantage to buy this brand. They have to be
able to tell her why we carry one line of gloves and why she
wants that line, why we carry two kinds of tomato catsup and
two kinds of pickles, one line of candy and one line of
cookies.

"They aren't clerks but salesmen. They draw salesmen wages.
They have to earn their money, though. They work on wages
and commissions. They spend their spare time learning about
the

185

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

lines they are selling. My man who sell shoes is very glad
to spend an evening on his own time with the shoe salesman.
Two of my grocery clerks hjave left to me to go on the road
with houses from which I buy. They have made good because
they know what they are talking about."

PLATFORM: MERCHANDISE ON ITS MERITS

I have been trying to emphasize the importance of getting
back to the merchandise because recognition of that is a
prerequisite to the appreciation of the fundamental
soundness of the policy I am recommending.

National advertisers say, in effect, that the mere fact a
product is being successfully advertised is a guarantee of
the merit of the article.

THE MARKET MASTER is the name of a weekly paper published by
THE CINCINNATI POST which it distributes free of charge to
retailers in Cincinnati. The object of THE MARKET MASTER is
to educate the dealers in better merchandising methods and
to insist that advertised goods be furnished customers
rather than "just as good" substitutes.

THE POST of course, is not a philanthropic institution. THE
POST is not indulging in such an expensive luxury as the
publication of this weekly for mere glory. It uses its
distribution of THE

186

VEESUS PEOSPEEITY

MARKET MASTER as a means of inducing national advertisers to
advertise in THE POST.

A recent issue of THE MARKET MASTER contains an article by
H. A. Groh, written for the purpose of convincing retailers
that they should handle advertised products because such
articles are a protection to the consumer. The article,
while it appears in a retailer's paper, is really addressed
to consumers.

NOTHING CAN SUCCEED THROUGH ADVERTISING UNLESS THE ARTICLE
ITSELF HAS MERIT

" Advertised goods protect the consumer, " says Mr. Groh. "
Advertising does more than introduce new ideas to you. It
safeguards you in the purchase of any advertised product.
You can depend upon it nothing can succeed through ad-
vertising unless the article itself has merit. Advertising a
bad product will make just as many enemies for that product
as advertising a good product will make friends for the good
product. And so, if an article has been widely advertised
for a long time, you can be sure that it is good or the
public would never have supported it. You know that the
advertised and trademarked product must have a definite
quality and must be fully worth the price. You can be sure
that you get more real value in an advertised product for
every penny you spend, than you will in an

187

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

unadvertised product, because advertising is the cheapest
selling method there is."

In the good old days when patent medicine advertising
flourished like the green bay tree, these nationally
advertised fakes greeted readers in the pages of the most
respectable of magazines. There were proprietary remedies in
those days, just as there are some today, which were
articles of merit. But the conspicuously successfully ad-
vertised patent medicines were "bad products" to use
Mr. Groh's term.

According to Samuel Hopkins Adams they (and their
advertising) constituted "The Great American Fraud."

Now if what Mr. Groh says is true, the more these "bad
products" were advertised, the quicker they should have
disappeared from the market.

But the exact reverse was what took place. For literally
centuries some of these fakes had been advertised. Some of
the best known of these frauds had been advertised to the
American public for decades. The more they were adver-
tised, the greater was the public demand for them.

They had been exposed time and time again. The expose was
drowned out in a flood of advertising.

But when Norman Hapgood in COLLIER'S WEEKLY shamed the
publishers of the country into shutting

188

VERSUS PROSPERITY

these fakes out of their advertising columns, they collapsed
one after another. The advertising, instead of driving them
off the market, as Mr.  Groh claims, kept them on the
market. The moment the advertising was shut off, these "bad
products" faded into innocuous desuetude. As merchandise
they could not sustain their sales.

I am citing this not for the purpose of suggesting that
nationally advertised products are akin to these arrant
frauds, but solely for the purpose of proving beyond the
question of a doubt that the national advertising of a
product has absolutely nothing to do with its quality, and
that national advertising is a force which can be
successfully used to sell all grades of a product good, bad
or indifferent.

National advertising is no substitute for the need of
studying merchandise itself by the retailer and the
consumer.

The advocates of national advertising who claim that
"nothing can succeed through advertising unless the article
itself has merit," reason as follows:

1.  The public stops buying products which are not equal in
    merit to the representations made in advertising them;

2.  The trademarking and advertising of products enables the
    public to identify unsatisfactory

189

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

products, and to check each product against the claims made
in advertising it;

3.  Therefore a manufacturer who makes a bad product and
    advertises it to the consumer will be driven out of
    business because, while the public will purchase the
    product once, it will not repurchase it.

There is only one thing wrong with this reasoning: the major
premise is not in accordance with facts. What the public
ought to do is assumed to be the same as what the public
does do.

It is a notorious fact that the public continues to buy poor
products year after year when better products are available,
either because it is unable to judge of the quality, or
because the amount involved in each purchase is not
sufficient to induce the consumer to reason about the
purchase each time it is made. It is possible to
indefinitely sell over-priced, inferior, and even worthless
merchandise if the advertising campaign be large enough and
shrewd enougn, and the article itself not sufficiently
important for customers to carefully weigh the question of
its merits each time it is bought.

Upon this subject what more can I do than to qiuote the
words of so authoritative a judge of merchandise values as
Edward S. Filene, of William Filene 's Sons, Boston: "I want
to put it down as a conviction which has grown out of all

190

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the experience of my years in business, that poor values can
be sold lay large, persistent advertising. Witness the
immense sale of patent medicines. It is simply a question of
psychology the hammering into people T s minds of a certain
idea until finally they accept it. If the .sacrifice to
accept is it not so big as to make a constant reinvest!-
gation of that idea necessary and that is the important part
; if it is a thing in common use, that is not extraordinary
in price, that does not force them each time to think out
whether they should buy it or whether they should stop and
consider if they are really getting full value and really
paying only what it is worth, they will submit to the
suggestion hammered into their consciousness until it has
become almost a part of themselves that a certain thing, at
a certain price, is the best value in the market.

"We ought not to do anything that will stand in the way of
younger men growing up, with their newer and more up to the
times ideas getting their chance. But they do not get their
chance when the market is pre-empted by trademarked articles
with the advantage of enormous profits and enormous funds to
advertise back of them, so that by constant hammering of
their names into the public mind those articles get such
possession of the buying public that reasoning buyers do not
use ordinary reasoning and caution in purchasing

191

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

them, and buy them because of their advertising, although
they may have been reduced in quality or they may have been
reduced in weight.

"While all this is happening, and the old trademarked thing
is at least tending to deteriorate, there are being produced
other articles by younger, more efficient, better educated,
better trained men better for the public to buy in quality
and design and all things, and the public does not buy them
because there have been such enormous profits in the
trademarked article that the public has been advertised and
talked to and plied with booklets until they have come to
believe that this article has superiorities that they, not
being chemists and analysts and so forth, cannot find out
that it does not possess."

AN ADVERTISING AGENCY 's UNFLATTERING PICTUEE OP THE
PUBLIC'S INTELLIGENCE

George Batten & Company of New York, one of the largest
advertising agencies in the country, had this to say upon
the ease with which the public can be fooled, in a four-page
advertisement in PRINTERS' INK:

"Brown in Boston White in New York.

"Public buying habits take queer streaks.

"In Boston the housewife insists on big brown eggs and will
pay an advanced price for them.

192

VERSUS PROSPERITY

Mrs. New York must have white eggs, and th.e wily dealer
sorts his eggs and extracts several cents a dozen more from
his patrons for his paleface eggs.

"Thus an old notion handed down from generation to
generation forms public opinion as to eggs. It regulates egg
commerce.

"Any woman on cross examination will probably admit that an
egg is an egg the world over, be it brown or white. The next
day she will go out and insist on having either white or
brown eggs.

"Certain manufacturers who advertise enjoy the same
advantages over their competitors as does the little brown
ihen that lays the big brown egg for Mrs. Boston. They have
sensed the fact that the public buys with unreasoning
insistance the product with familiar markings, even though
it does not know why. Many advertised articles occupy a
pedestal because of superior outstanding qualities. But
there are unquestionably advertised goods, largely
purchased, which have no striking advantage over other goods
of equally high quality, except that they are better known
and more accessible.

"Brown eggs or white eggs are better in public opinion
according to what the public has been led to believe. So it
is with merchandise. Favorable

193

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

public opinion for a commodity usually exists in proportion
to the insistence and persistence with which the product is
advertised/'

Here is admission of the fact, by an authority whom all
national advertisers will accept, that an article does not
have to be superior to others in order to be successfully
advertised.

If it can be profitably advertised in spite of the fact that
it is not superior, then the mere fact that an article has
been wisely advertised for many years is no assurance
whatever of the superiority of that article to the
competitive articles which have not been advertised as much
or which have not been advertised at all.

194

XVI

THE RETAILERS ' OPPORTUNITY

In beginning this series of articles, I asked a number of
questions. These questions have been answered from many
different viewpoints.

One of the questions asked was, is it a good thing for the
public to buy nationally advertised merchandise in
preference to merchandise which, is not thus advertised?

RAISING THE CONSUMER PRICE

I have shown that, if the national advertiser is successful,
he has the power to raise the consumer price on his product.

Have national advertisers exercised this power!

In most lines, nationally advertised goods are undoubtedly
more expensive than goods of the same grade which are not
advertised. In clothing it may only be ten per cent, more
than the price which the garment would command ordinarily.
In foods it is frequently one thousand per cent, more.

In theory, the advertiser's " saving on production and
overhead " are supposed to pay for the national advertising.

195

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

In practice, the advertiser makes the public or the retailer
pay not only the cost of the advertising, but also a
dividend upon his capitalization of the " good-will "
created by advertising.

On this score of price alone, it is not a good thing for the
public to buy the nationally advertised product, l\^his,
however, is not the only reason why the question must be
answered in the negative, even after giving careful
consideration to the various advantages which can be truth-
fully claimed for nationally advertised products.

THE SENSE OF VALUES DESTROYED

National advertising has destroyed the consumer's sense of
values.

Originally values were fixed by the actual qualities that
went into the material or making of a product. The consumer
of today takes the product itself for granted if the label
guarantees that it is the same as the product he has
formerly used.

Among two products, both nationally advertised, the consumer
judges mainly by price because he has no other measure of
values.

MIS-EDUCATING THE CONSUMER

The consumer has today few chances of learning impartially
about the actual merits of the

196

VERSUS PROSPERITY

products offered him, for the newspapers and magazines which
he reads insistently preach in their reading columns as well
as the advertising pages that he should "buy by the label."

We are a reading nation.

But the papers and periodicals we read are largely supported
by national advertising. It would not be in human nature for
the publishers of them to urge their readers to subject the
claims of their advertisers to searching tests.

Unfortunately for the consumer, national advertising has
been the creator of merchants and sales clerks who know
little or nothing about the merchandise they sell. Instead
of the consumer being able to rely upon them for guidance,
the retailers who handle nationally advertised products have
become mere slot-machines which deliver automatically the
various labels and packages for which the consumer asks.

ABE CONSUMERS SATISFIED?

Instead of the consumer being pleased, especially in those
lines in which national advertising is dominant, with the
practical elimination of the retailer as a selective factor,
he has become increasingly resentful of the higher prices
which he pays under the present regime, and less and less
satisfied with the prices which the retailers insist they
have to charge.

197

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

Consumers buy from retailers. They have no direct contract
with producers.

The very fact that they must visit their resentment first of
all upon the retailer, constitutes a real opportunity for
retailers to secure for themselves a far better relationship
both with those to whom they sell and with those from whom
they buy.

THE PUBLIC DISTBUST OF THE MIDDLEMAN

In spite of the fact that the retailer is so well
established a factor in present day civilization, he still
labors under the odium which the public attaches to those
who are " middlemen. " This is the way E. H. Macy & Co. of
New York once described the modern public's state of mind
toward retailers:

"Barter is almost as old as civilization itself, but the
modern method of retailing, like banking, is of recent
growth. Both professions have struggled against unscrupulous
practices within and misunderstanding without.

"When bankers began to loan out money at interest the
opprobrium of the name \* moneychanger \> attached itself to
them. But as their standards advanced they grew in public
esteem and won an enviable place in the confidence of the
community.

198

VERSUS PROSPERITY

" Retailers as a class have quite recently, like the bankers
of earlier days, run the gauntlet of bitter attack, but
subsequent developments have proved that the criticism on
the whole was unjustified."

Retailers can correct this criticism if they will. Not
merely, however, by treating the public right in the matter
of prices, for the modern public knows too little of values
to be a competent judge of whether retailers \* margins are
excessive. Principally by educating the public about one
fact in retailing which few merchants themselves fully
appreciate: that success in retailing is not dependent so
much upon large margins of profits as upon large numbers of
permanent customers. The retailer who sells his customers on
this fact, wins their confidence. He will not mislead them
about his merchandise because it is not to his interest to
do so.

WINNING THE CUSTOMER MAKES THE RETAILER INDEPENDENT

Retailers who succeed in that, automatically eliminate most
of the criticism about their prices, since their customers
then realize that retailers as a whole simply pass along
increases and decreases to the public.

But to have some measure of control in buying 199

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

their merchandise, they must teach the public to buy on a
merchandise and not a label basis. They must talk to the
public about grades of merchandise, rather than about brands
of merchandise.

In educating their customers about hjow to buy merchandise,
they at the same time make it possible for themselves to buy
upon a merchandise basis, and not upon a basis of consumer
demand created by national advertising.

The retailer is thus enabled to buy merchandise at its true
value in the open market. He can put upon it a margin of
profit which his experience proves necessary, instead of
operating on the margins which national advertisers allow
him. For the same reason, he is then able to determine for
himself the quantities he buys on at least an equal basis
with manufacturers, instead of having national advertisers
fix them arbitrarily.

With customers educated to buy merchandise instead of
brands, he needs only to carry a stock consisting of the
various grades for which his trade calls. He may actually
carry a larger quantity of each of these grades than he
would carry of each of a number of advertised brands, and
yet have a smaller stock as a whole. Not only would his
turn-over be more rapid, but his lines would be more
complete.

200

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

PRESENT DAY LIMITATIONS OF THE RETAILER

Under present conditions it is almost impossible for
retailers to more than strive toward these conditions.

The public is so accustomed to having the advertised brands
handed out that it must first be re-educated.

Each individual retailer can, however, educate his own
customers. The educational process must begin, not with the
customer, but with himself and his clerks. No sale should be
considered a really finished sale unless the customer is
made familiar with the technical reasons why the merchant
sells that particular article. The more familiar the
customer becomes with materials, workmanship, qualities,
etc., the easier it is to satisfy him with good merchandise
regardless of the label which it carries.

In addition to what the individual retailer does with his
customers, the retailers' associations can do a great deal
to bring about a better appreciation by the public of the
work which retailers do. If the associations once appreciate
that they can act in unison to improve and standardize the
merchandise they sell, without affecting in the least their
margins for profit, they would find great scope for useful
activities which would mean better merchandise for their
customers, and

201

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

public appreciation of a public service by the retailers.

To serve the public more and more is really the retailer's
opportunity to free himself from the pressure put upon him
by national advertising.

202

PART III

MANUFACTURING AND NATIONAL ADVERTISING

XVII MANUFACTURING AND ADVERTISING

The marketing of his 'product profitably is, under present
conditions, the problem of problems for the manufacturer.

The average manufacturer is apt to give serious thought to
the subject of national advertising only when the matter is
put up to him as something that he should undertake in his
own business. And he is then apt to think of it simply as a
question to be decided solely from the standpoint of, Does
it pay?

Yet the subject deserves the most serious consideration of
every manufacturer, quite without regard to whether he
himself is an actual or prospective national advertiser.

The growth of national advertising has affected the
marketing problem of all manufacturers.

If a manufacturer's competitors are national advertisers, of
course the matter is of interest to him. The question of
whether he should follow their example or adopt some other
method of meeting this sort of competition certainly
deserves consideration by him.

205

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

But even through none of his competitors are national
advertisers; even though his line may be one which it has
been conceded " cannot be advertised, ' ' there is still
reason for giving the subject thought. For if a single line
of industry indulges in national advertising, the question
of whether that industry is stimulating consumer expenditure
in its line, and proportionately decreasing consumer
expenditure in all other lines, requires the consideration
of every manufacturer.

The spread of national advertising, therefore, raises three
questions for the consideration of a manufacturer:

First, should he become a national advertiser!

Secondly, what should he do if any of his competitors are
national advertisers?

Thirdly, what should he do if manufacturers of other lines
of products are by their national advertising securing
business to an extent which reduces demand for his line?

THE NATIONAL ADVERTISING INDUSTRIES

In the course of an address before the National Piano
Manufacturers' Association, Charles Coolidge Parlin, of the
commercial research division of the Curtis Publishing Co.,
Philadelphia, made use of the following chart, which shows
the relative extent to which national advertising is

206

VERSUS PROSPERITY

used in marketing the products of the various industries of
the country.

MILLIONS OF DOLLARS 5 G 7 8 9 !0 II 12

14 15

SOAPS & CLEANSERS

TOTAL ADVERTISING

10 CLASSES

CARRYING

LARGEST AMOUNT OF ADVERTISING

IN

1921

36 LEADIN6 PU8UCATK3f6KlW

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS

If national advertising is a force capable of influencing
consumers to expend their earnings in accordance with the
will of the advertisers, then these ten classes of
industries are tending to divert business from those
industries not included in the chart to those industries
engaged in heavy advertising. That this actually takes place
has been the argument which has been used as the

207

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

basis of most co-operative advertising campaigns. Before we
can undertake to answer the three questions asked above, it
is necessary to understand why these classes of industries
are leading national advertisers. Incidentally, we shall
learn the truth about whether their advertising really
influences trade adversely to those industries which
advertise little or not at all.

There are two ways in which the national advertising of
these industries can deflect trade.

The first way is by increasing the prices which the consumer
pays for the purchase of the same quantity of these kinds of
goods. This way presupposes that a consumer who has been
spending \$50 per month for groceries, and buying a certain
quantity of groceries for the money, continues to buy the
same quantity of foodstuffs, but is persuaded to pay \$60
per month for them by the national advertisers. As the
consumer's earnings are fixed by outside factors and are
therefore not subject to the influence of the manufacturers
whose products he buys, if he spends \$60 instead of \$50
for groceries, he will have \$10 less to spend for other
things.

The second way in which these industries can deflect trade
from the non-advertising manufacturers is by persuading the
consumer to buy a greater quantity of the advertised
products than he would otherwise buy. This means that if the

208

VERSUS PROSPERITY

consumer bought \$50 worth of groceries originally, he is
persuaded to consume, let us say, a 20 per cent, greater
quantity of groceries than before. He would thus spend \$60,
and, as before, would have \$10 less to spend. If, at the
same time, he paid higher prices for the advertised
products, he would spend about \$70 per month instead of
\$50, and the deflection then would amount to \$20 per
month.

THE PART PLAYED BY THE RETAILER

The argument described above would be sound but for the part
played by the retailer in distribution.

If all classes of retailers were mere delivery agents for
the manufacturers, nationally advertisers could divert trade
in proportion to the extent to which the various classes of
industries advertised. But they are not. The retailers, as
we have pointed out, actually influence the purchase of
merchandise much more than the national advertisers. The
question really, therefore, hinges upon whether the various
classes of retailers influence the consumer in the same
direction as do the national advertisers.

Instead of working in the same direction, the retailers
actually influence the consumer in inverse proportion to the
extent to which the manufacturers advertise.

209

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

I mean by this that in those industries which are listed on
the chart, the retailers and dealers do least to influence
consumer expenditure, while in those industries which are
not on the chart, the retailers powerfully influence the ex-
penditures of consumers.

And this is only natural, because the success of the
national advertisers more or less involves the atrophy of
the selling ability of the retailers who handle their
products.

210

xvni

' ' ADVEBTISABILIT Y '

Why is it that the volume of national advertising of food
products is so much greater than that of men's clothing?

Why is there so much more advertising of soaps and cleansers
than of women's wear?

One would imagine that the amount of national advertising in
each industry would be roughly proportioned to the relative
size of the various industries. Why is it that the relative
volumes of their advertising, as shown by the chart in the
previous chapter, is not distributed in this way?

In chemistry there is a law, known as Mendeleef r s periodic
law, which states that all natural elements arrange
themselves in groups in accordance with their specific
gravities.

The answer to the question asked above is found in a
somewhat analogous principle, that the various industries
indulge in national advertising in proportion to the "
advertis ability" of their products.

Advertisability may be defined as the quality in a product
which enables it to be successfully ad-

211

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

vertised to the consumer. The more advertisable a product
is, the greater is the temptation of the makers of it to
nationally advertise it.

'Since food and soaps are more freely advertised than men's
clothing or women's wear, it is plain that food and soaps
must be more advertisable. It is of vital importance for a
manufacturer to know just how advertisable his product is,
because as the advertisability of a product de- creases, the
hazard of the manufacturer who undertakes to nationally
advertise it increases.

A national advertising campaign is hazardous at best. With a
product that is deficient in advertisability, it becomes
extra hazardous. To appreciate just how perilous advertising
is; to vividly see how many such campaigns fail, pick up a
copy of some national magazine of fifteen or twenty years
ago. The advertising pages read like tombstones in a
cemetry; monuments recording the graves of advertising
campaigns; lists of firms which have failed or which if
still in existence, have miraculously survived their losses.

There are advertising agencies that solemnly assert that
every product is advertisable.

One such agency inserted a double-page advertisment in
PRINTERS' INK with the heading, "Is There Anything
Unadvertisable V ' It followed this with an argument
designed to prove that everything from soup to cast-iron is
advertisable.

212

VERSUS PROSPERITY

There is, however, a very real difference between what may
be nothing more than effective publicity, and successful
advertising. Publicity may succeed in making the public
familiar with what a manufacturer has to offer. When a man-
ufacturer indulges in national publicity, it does not make a
particle of difference how effective his campaign may be it
is beyond his powers to calculate his profits in dollars and
cents from it. It may gratify his vanity, but that does not
alter the stubborn fact that his business would have been
just as successful had he indulged in no national
advertising at all.

Successful advertising, on the other hand, results in very
tangible figures on balance sheet. Results must be apparent
in dollars and cents or the advertising cannot be said to be
profitable.

If a manufacturer, who contemplates advertising to the
consumer, wants to know in advance whether his campaign is
going to produce for him mere publicity, or whether his
campaign is going to produce for him mere publicity, or
whether it is going to produce profits that are visible in
his books, he must first determine the degree to which his
product is advertisable.

THE FOUR CANONS OF ADVERTISAB1LITY

The advertisability of a product is determined by four
factors, all of which are involved in its

213

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

distribution and sale to the ultimate consumer.

These four factors are, first, the margin for profit; the
difference between cost of production and consumer price.

Second, the frequency of its purchase by the consumer.

Third, the variability of the consideration which determines
the customer's purchase of it.

Fourth, the extent to which the dealer determines the
customer's selection of the product.

A product is highly advertisable when it is "high" in the
first two factors and "low" in the second two factors.

It may be advertisable if it is extremely high in only one
of the first two factors, provided it is not also extremely
low in either of the other two factors.

It is almost unadvertisable if it is low in the first two
factors, even though it may be low in the last two factors.

It is absolutely unadvertisable if it is low in the first
two factors and high in the last two factors.

214

YTY

ADVERTISABILITY THE MARGIN FOB PROFIT

By the margin for profit I mean the difference between the
manufacturer's actual cost of producing the product and the
price which it is possible to secure from the public for it.

The actual cost of production includes the raw materials,
the labor, the manufacturing overhead, and a reasonable
profit on the investment needed for production.

If the public is now paying, or can be persuaded to pay,
about five times this production cost, the product is
probably advertisable.

If a product costs 10 cents to make, and the public can be
made to pay 50 cents for it then the difference of 40 cents
will probably be sufficient to cover the cost of the
national advertising, the manufacturer's profit upon his
investment and cost of marketing it, and the whole- saler's
and retailer's margins for handling it.

If it can be sold for more than 50 cents, let us say for \$1
or \$2, then it is almost certainly advertisable.

215

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

On the other hand, if the price which the consumer can be
persuaded to pay is less than five times the production
cost; if it is only two or three times as much as it costs
to make it, it cannot be profitably advertised, unless the
frequency of purchase tends to offset its deficiency in
margin for profit. As we shall see, frequency of purchase
may make it possible to advertise an article upon which the
margin for profit is comparatively low.

What has been so far said concerning margin for profit has
disregarded the apportioning of selling margins of
wholesalers and retailers. This is a consideration of great
importance when a product is marketed without national
advertising. It is still important, though not nearly of so
much importance, when it is nationally advertised, because
the national advertiser soon learns that if he "puts over" a
successful campaign, he becomes the arbiter of these
margins. They are largely removed from competitive
influences.

He can very readily reduce the margin of the wholesaler to a
mere fraction of what is customary for unadvertised products
in the same line, because he can always go over the head of
the wholesaler and either take orders through specialty
salesmen or establish his own wholesaling organization.

And, of course, he can reduce the margin of the 216

VERSUS PROSPERITY

retailer and invent for the retailer's entertainment the
theory that it is easier to sell his advertised product than
other merchandise which is unadvertised.

If the manufacturer's advertising campaign has been really
effective, it is not difficult to make the retailer concede
the truth of this.

It is then easy for the manufacturer's salesmen to make the
dealer overlook the fact that, while he may sell the
advertised article with less effort (and less profit), if
his customers spend more with him for the advertised
product, they will have less to spend with him for other
merchandise.

217

XX

ADVERTISABILITY AND FREQUENCY OF PURCHASE

Of equal importance with the question of " margin for profit
" in determining the advertisability of a product, is the
frequency with which consumers purchase it.

The manufacturer of rugs and carpets cannot advertise his
products to consumers profitably largely because of the
infrequency with which they are purchased. The average
consumer of rugs buys them rarely. They wear for decades
even the cheaper ones, and the better ones become family
heirlooms which are used by more than one generation. It is
therefore almost impossible for the advertising manufacturer
to sufficiently impress consumers, who are in the market for
rugs and carpets only a few times in their lives, to make
them "look for the label' ' when buying.

But as the frequency of purchase increases the product
becomes more and more advertisable.

Flour, for instance, is purchased very frequently. It is
therefore advertisable, in spite of moderate margins for
profit. While the margin

218

VERSUS PROSPERITY

for exploitation on each sale may not be as large as on a
breakfast food, the aggregate of the profits made upon the
sales to each consumer persuaded to buy it is sufficient to
justify its being advertised. A product like a breakfast
food, with a margin of profit of twenty, thirty and forty
times its cost of production, and with a high frequency of
purchase, makes an ideal product for national ad- vertising.

A patent medicine is, for the same reasons, high in
advertisability, especially if it has only psychological
curative properties. The consumer buys the medicine
frequently because it makes h.im "feel" better, and since it
does not cure him, he keeps on buying it just as long as his
faith in its virtues persists. If the medicine has a strong
percentage of spirits frementi, or any ingredient which is
habit forming, he finds it unpleasant to stop using it.

Anything that is habit forming, and therefore frequently
purchased, is almost certainly advertisable. This is the
real explanation for the enormous profits in certain
conspicuously successful advertised beverages, and why the
"goodwill" and name of one soft drink is reputed to be worth
five million dollars. Of course, beer and whiskey, in the
days before prohibition, were among the highly advertisable
products for this reason.

319

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

Manufacturers who have discovered the importance of
frequency of purchase have artificially increased this
factor in their products, by packing them in smaller
cartons. The makers of foods and soaps have steadily
encouraged the public to purchase small packages and
purchase them frequently.

On the other hand, articles of wearing apparel and items in
dry goods are not frequently purchased. While the average
consumer may shop in clothing and dry goods stores
frequently, the purchases are distributed over a vast number
of items, most of which are used and worn for many months
before they must be repurchased.

The average overcoat and suit is worn more than one season.
Once upon a time they used to last a lifetime. In spite of
the emphasis upon the "style" element in men's clothing, and
the introduction of seasonable variations in cut and
fabrics, men buy clothing on the average only two or three
times a year. While it is easier to make them remember the
name of a certain brand of clothing than it is to make them
remember a certain brand of rugs, it is much more difficult
for advertisers to achieve either of the above results than
for them to make the women remember the name of a brand of
soap which they buy every week.

220

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

Frequency of purchase is therefore an important element in
determining advertisability for two reasons; because it
makes it easier to create in consumers the habit of asking
for a brand or label, and because it supplements or offsets
any deficiency in the margin for profit on a product.

To appreciate the importance of this second influence, a few
words of explanation are needed.

When a manufacturer advertises, his advertising creates for
him, if it is successful, a body of consumers who ask for
his brand. Let us assume that he spends \$100,000 a year,
and that he succeeds in securing from his campaign 100,000
customers. He has therefore invested \$1 in each customer
that year. To make his advertising profitable he must sell
the customers on the average enough of his goods within a
year to cover his advertising expenditure. If his article
costs him 10 cents, and it is sold to the consumer for 50
cents, he will lose money if the customer buys only one
article a year.

But if the customer buys it frequently in the course of a
year, let us say 12 times, he can make a handsome profit
upon his advertising expenditure. The 12 articles would cost
him \$1.20, and the advertising \$1.00 a total of \$2.20 per
customer per year. As the customer would pay \$6.00 for the
products out of which the manufac-

221

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

turer would probably get \$4.00, the rest going to the
distributors, it is plain enough that the more frequently an
article is purchased, the greater are the chances for
profitably advertising it.

222

ADVERTISABILITY AND THE CONSID-

EEATION WHICH DETERMINES THE

CUSTOMER'S PURCHASE

Strange as it may sound, a specialized staple makes the best
product for national advertising.

This is the reason so many nationally advertised products
prove upon analysis to be staples which have in some way
been converted into specialties.

Soap, for instance, is a staple. To make it a specialty, all
the soap manufacturer has to do is to distinctly color it,
scent, pack it, or flake it, so as to make it "different"
from other soaps. Yet it remains a staple in spite of these
artificial differences, because once people buy it they will
continue buying it indefinitely.

In the case of a toilet soap, for instance, we know that the
consideration which determines the customer's purchase of it
is the cleansing power of the soap. As long as faces and
hands continue to get dirty, toilet soaps will be purchased
for this same reason. The consideration which determines the
customer's purchase is therefore a stable one.

223

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

This is a very important, though a little understood factor,
in determining the advertisability of various products. If a
manufacturer wants to base an advertising campaign upon
sound study and reasoning, he must determine whether the
consideration which decides the customer in buy- ing his
product is fairly constant, or whether it is something which
fluctuates from season to season. But before it is possible
for him to determine whether it is stable or unstable, it is
necessary for him to learn the deciding consideration of the
customer.

The deciding consideration of the customer varies with
nearly every product bought.

In the case of women's coats and suits, as in the case of
nearly all women's outer wear, the deciding consideration is
never stable. Into the determination of the customer's
purchase of a coat or suit comes the element of style, which
cannot be stabilized. No matter how much a manufacturer may
advertise his garments, no matter how successful his
advertising may have been, the majority of women will ignore
the labels in the garments shown them in the stores while
trying to pick and choose one with a style which they feel
most becoming.

The style, pattern, design element plays an enormous and
generally unsuspected part in wrecking many national
advertising campaigns.

224

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

When a manufacturer, whose product is one which is purchased
by the public because of some such element, becomes a
national advertiser, he adds to all the ordinary risks of a
hazardous undertaking a handicap that is almost
insurmountable.

Millinery, dresses, skirts, suits, coats, in fact, most of
the things which women wear, are either entirely absent from
lists of leading nationally advertised products or so far
down the list as to be comparatively negligible.

Furniture, in which the design is the determining
consideration in sale to consumers, cannot be nationally
advertised for this reason. Wallpaper, carpets, rugs and
most textiles, in which pattern is the determining
consideration, are not nationally advertisable.

It may be laid down as an almost absolute rule that to the
degree to which style, pattern or design, determines the
purchase of a product, to that degree is it difficult to
advertise it.

Women's hosiery is a product which conforms to most of the
canons of advert is ability. There is an ample margin for
profit; the frequency of purchase is satisfactory; the
dealer is used to handling advertised brands, and for many
years the style element was not the determining con-
sideration in the purchase of hosiery by women.

In the last few years, however, styles have begun to play a
part in the purchase of hosiery.

225

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

The nationally advertised brands have had to keep up with
the styles, or run the risks of losing their customers.

If a certain manufacturer did not make sheer silk hosiery
when that was decreed by fashion, and a woman who had been
in the habit of buying her hosiery was out to buy the new
sheer style is there any doubt that she would have bought
that style irrespective of the brand on the box from which
it was selected!

There is no question but that if hosiery were to be
altogether purchased by style, the volume of hosiery
advertising would shrink as the manufacturers discovered
that their product was less and less advertisable.

B26

XXII

ADVERTISABILITY AND RETAILER INFLUENCE

The greater the extent to which the customers ' selection of
any particular product is influenced by the retailer, the
less advertisable is that product.

There are many products, like Castoria, which the customer
determines to buy before getting into the store, and with
the selection of which the retailer has therefore almost
nothing to do.

The manufacturer, through his advertising, sells the product
to the consumer.

The retailer merely delivers it upon request.

Of course some druggists do make the effort to sell
equivalents or substitutes to those who ask for Castoria.
The American Druggists Syndicate makes a whole line of
"substitutes" which members of this cooperative organization
sell to customers who ask for the nationally advertised
preparations. In spite of this competition, it remains a
fact that the overwhelming majority of druggists perform a
mere mechanical service with regard to the products they
sell, and this

227

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

adds to the advertisability of drugs and explains the
attractiveness of this field for the national advertiser.

What is true of proprietor\^ medicines is true of toilet
goods, of groceries, of soaps and washing powders, and of
most of the nationally advertised products the retailers
through whom they are sold perform the functions of vending
machines and thus increase the advertisability of the
products sold by them.

When we come to an altogether different class of retailers
the clothiers and furnishers, the cloak and suit stores, the
dry goods and department stores who still merchandise and
take advantage of every opportunity to influence the
customer's selection of the merchandise he is buying, we
find that many of the products which have to be sold through
them are difficult to advertise to consumers. They are less
advertisable than products sold by grocers, druggists, and
similar retailers.

The manufacturers of products sold by these retailers are
not as heavy national advertisers as those whose products
are sold through dealers who do little to influence customer
selection.

The action and reaction of these two forces the national
advertisers and the retailers has resulted in the
development of two distinct selling policies by the
manufacturers.

228

VERSUS PROSPERITY

In the case of those products which are handled by retailers
who simply hand out what the public asks for, the policy is
to get the product on the shelves of every retailer so as to
put no resistance in the way of consumers getting the
product in which they have become interested through ad-
vertising.

An interesting sidelight upon this policy is the tendency of
national advertisers, whose products normally are
distributed through retailers who "sell," to break away from
these retailers and get their products sold through less
difficult channels. The makers of Ingersoll watches, for
instance, in order to get away from the limitations imposed
by the jewelers, put their watches on sale in all sorts of
stores drug stores, stationery stores, hardware stores any
kind of store where the retailer was willing to hand out the
merchandise asked for instead of having something to say to
the customer concerning the wisdom of what the national
advertiser was persuading him to buy.

The other policy was applied by the national advertiser to
those products which had to be sold through retailers who
insisted upon merchandising them rather than merely vending
them. This was the policy of the exclusive agency. And it
has helped to make many products nationally advertisable,
which, but for the opiate thus ad-

229

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

ministered to the merchant, could not be profitably
advertised.

The principal elements which enter into the ad-
vertisability of products and which should be given
consideration by a manufacturer who is contemplating the
national advertising of his product have now been covered.

If the product has an ample margin for profit and is
frequently purchased, and if the consideration which
determines the consumer's purchase is not too unstable and
the retailers are willing to "vend" the product, it can be
nationally advertised profitably.

A manufacturer whose product does not sufficiently meet
these requirements can sometimes slightly change his product
and thus make it advertisable.

If his product is a standard product one of those staples
which have been evolved by years of test and trial he can
sometimes make it advertisable by departing from the
standard. He can introduce some slight innovation, which may
be of no particular importance, but which may enable him to
increase his margin for profit by convincing the public
through his advertising that the variation makes the product
more valuable. If it is a product which can be packaged, he
can increase its frequency of purchase by packing it in
smaller sizes.

230

VERSUS PROSPERITY

Changes of this sort may in addition furnish him good
"talking points," of which advertising copywriters will make
the most, and thus give the public a vague feeling that his
product is a superior one.

If he thus takes his product out of the staple and standard,
he may gain if his advertising campaign is successful, while
the only possible losers will be the public who will pay for
his success, or the retailers who will be annoyed by the
appearance of one more brand which must either be added to
their stock or have to be offset by greater sales effort on
what they already carry.

231

xxin

WHEN THE MANUFACTURER SHOULD BECOME A NATIONAL ADVERTISER

In beginning the study of the question of national
advertising from the standpoint of the manufacturer, I asked
three questions.

The first question was, Should the manufacturer become a
national advertiser? I have tried to point out the supreme
importance of determining the advertisability of his product
as a prerequisite to answering this question.

If his product is advertisable, or can be made advertisable,
and he can finance an advertising campaign, most advertising
agencies will urge him to make the venture.

In spite of the fact that the day for inexpensive and
comparatively easy advertising successes have passed, he may
make a success of his campaign. Before the present era of
1,000,000 circulations and full page advertisements, the
cost of creating adequate consumer demand was a fraction of
what it is today. This is something which the manufacturer
should not forget when advertising men point to some of the
great reputations

232

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

created by advertising. How long ago were these reputations
created? Is it probable that a similar reputation can be
profitably created at present-day costs of advertising?
Above all, is there any other effective way by which he can
meet the competition of the national advertisers already in
his field?

We shall see that there are other effective methods, and
that manufacturers can decide not to advertise to consumers
not merely from a negative standpoint, but actually from a
positive standpoint. We shall see how this question can be
answered in the negative by a manufacturer who deliberately
adopts a policy that he thinks is more profitable for
himself than advertising to consumers.

THE MANUFACTURER AND HIS ADVERTISING COMPETITORS

What should a manufacturer do if he is ambitious to develop
his business and finds that many of his leading competitors
are national advertisers?

The first thing for him to do is to discount the glamor
which surrounds every advertising success. This is
imperative if his judgment is to be correct as to the
question of whether the success was due to the national
advertising, or whether the national advertising followed
and was inci-

233

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

dental to a success which was really the outgrowth of other
policies.

A clothing manufacturer once told the writer a remarkable
story to illustrate the glamor which advertising puts about
a perfectly ordinary product. He had been for years
associated with factories which made advertised clothes, and
naturally was familiar with every operation involved in the
making of the garments. He knew that the materials they used
came from the same mills as those used by all clothing
manufacturers; that their methods of production were no
different, and the standards of workmanship no higher than
in other factories producing equal grades, and yet he said
that he could not pick up a suit of clothes or an overcoat
with one of their labels in it without feeling that it was
in some subtle way different from ordinary clothing.

This is a remarkable tribute to the power of the printed
statement. We are all apt to feel that the men whose doings
are frequently reported in the daily press, men ranging all
the way from criminals up to statesmen, are in some way
different from ordinary mortals. Familiarity with the famous
and the notorious will convince any man that they are just
as human, and frequently just as ordinary, as the average
man.

What is true of men, is also true of products. The mere fact
that they are advertised does not

234

VERSUS PROSPERITY

make them different, in spite of the " atmosphere " which
printed claims puts about them.

For this reason, a manufacturer who is considering following
in the footsteps of competitors who are advertising will do
well to try to rid himself of the influence which has been
described, and to remember that many manufacturers who have
never spent a cent for national advertising make greater
profits and have a sounder business than some of the leading
national advertisers in the same line.

As it exists today, national advertising is a game to be
played by financial giants only.

The increase in the number of national advertisers, the
increase in the size of the space used by them, and the
higher cost of advertising space, make enormous sums
necessary if advertising by a new manufacturer is to be
sufficient in volume to really create consumer demand for
his advertised brand.

The fact that the great quasi-monopolies have gone in for
national advertising is to a considerable degree responsible
for this. Corporations like the Standard Oil Company, and
its subsidiaries, and the various meat packing companies,
are well able to use pages and pages of space, and they make
it necessary for the other advertisers to compete with them
in size of space used if they are to secure a hearing. These
corporations

235

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

were gigantic institutions before they spent a dollar for
advertising; they have gone in for national advertising in
part to hold their position, and in part to increase their
margins on the products they advertise.

When a manufacturer who cannot afford to advertise heavily
enough to really influence the consumer, nevertheless
becomes a national advertiser for the purpose of "impressing
his dealers," he must be sure that his dealers are a very
unintelligent lot of business men.

If he hopes to really lead them into believing that a small
appropriation will really create a consumer demand for his
product, he will be in for disappointments. His salesmen
will very quickly enlighten him about the importance which
dealers attach to his advertising campaign. And the
difficulty which so many national advertisers find in
training their salesmen to talk about their advertising
rather than about their merchandise, shows that salesmen
realize that national advertising carries little weight with
merchants except in the case of the conspicuous leaders in
each line.

THE COMPETITION BETWEEN INDUSTEIES

The rise of national advertising, with its accompanying
concentration of consumer appeals in a few industries, has
had a profound influence

236

VERSUS PROSPERITY

on the growth of those industries the products of which are
not readily advertisable.

Just as there is competition within each industry (competing
makers of the same product each trying to secure the bulk of
the expenditures of the consumers for the product), so there
is a competition between each industry and all other
industries. Every industry is, so to speak, engaged in the
effort to divert as much of the ex- penditures of consumers
toward itself as is possible. The automobile industry, for
instance, has grown enormously year by year since its
inception. A great part of this growth represents
expenditures by consumers which have been diverted from
industries making other products. But for the expenditures
for automobiles, consumers would have purchased more or
better food, clothing and shelter. The extent of the
diversion is a matter of speculation, because the new
industry may only absorb some of the annual increase in the
earnings of consumers, and the total increase may have been
large enough to enable the other industries to grow as well.
But that the relative position of the various industries is
changed is obvious.

An excellent example of how national advertising has thus
diverted consumer expenditures is furnished in the summer
underwear field. A large, effective and long continued
advertising

237

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

campaign by a single manufacturer of athletic underwear has
greatly reduced the relative demand for knit underwear. The
advertising of what was originally a mere specialty, has
succeeded in convincing a great portion of the consuming
public that athletic underwear is more suitable for summer
wear than knit underwear.

But for the advertising to the consumer, the retailers would
have performed essentially an educational function in
advising their customers as to the relative merits of the
two garments.

With the consumers persuaded by the national advertising of
the athletic underwear maker to ask for his garments, the
retailers find it difficult to do anything except follow the
line of least resistance.

The relative sale of knit underwear has thus decreased year
by year, and now the knit underwear industry is considering
the use of national advertising for the purpose of
correcting the unbalanced condition which, but for the
national advertising, would never have developed. For- tunes
must be spent distribution must be loaded with additional
costs in order to try to reestablish normalcy. It is
doubtful, however, whether adding any amount of fuel to a
fire that is already burning briskly will tend to check the
fire itself.

238

VEESUS PEOSPEEITY

It does seem absurd to one who has resisted the glamor of
this age of national advertising, that staple fruits like
apples and oranges should be advertised.

The producers of these fruits have suffered, as most farmers
have suffered for years, from an out-of-date marketing
system. The development of well managed marketing
associations ought to be sufficient to correct these
inequalities. But in the case of these fruits, just as in
the case of underwear, the rise of national advertising has
diverted the expenditures of consumers to other foodstuffs
to a vast array of seemingly less expensive packaged and
trademarked food specialties. The public, especially the
urban public, has consumed relatively less fruit in the past
fifty years, for the very good reason that it was con-
suming greatly increased quantities of the food specialties
which were being popularized through advertising.

A recent advertisement of the American Association of
Advertising Agencies which has been published in newspapers
all over the country, exults at the fact that the California
Fruit Growers are now spending \$1,000,000 a year for
national advertising for the purpose of re-educating the
consumers to the eating of fruit.

"A big part of the cost of living today," says this
advertisement, "may be charged to lost mo-

239

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

tion, to slow, slipshod distribution of goods, and to
old-style, wasteful selling methods. "

Presumably the new style, rapid and economical method of
distributing goods requires national advertising.

For nearly fifty years there has been a steady increase in
the volume of advertised goods. During those fifty years, if
this advertisement is correct, distribution costs should
have come down. Instead, they have risen steadily and are
now more than twice as high. And yet we are told that the
remedy for high distribution costs is to increase the volume
of national advertising!

In spite of having answered the question in the affirmative
for years, the advocates of national advertising still have
to answer the question constantly being put to them by
manufacturers: " Would national advertising pay me!"

A really adequate answer to the question, however, requires
something less superficial than citing the fact that other
manufacturers made money while they were national
advertisers. This does not necessarily prove that they made
money because of their national advertising. To answer the
question adequately a principle must be laid down which will
apply to every manufacturer no matter what he produces; a
principle by which he can test his own chances in national
advertising.

240 I

VERSUS PROSPERITY

The answer to the question has been outlined in the
discussion of the question of advertisability.

A manufacturer's chances of profitably advertising to the
consumer is fundamentally dependant upon the advertisability
of his products.

If his product is a drug or food specialty, his chances are
fundamentally good, because of the advertisability of these
products. If he is producing women's wearing apparel, his
chances are fundamentally poor, because of the low advertis-
ability of the products.

We have already mentioned the fact that national advertising
is hazardous.

More national advertising campaigns fail than succeed.

The manufacturers who have lost money in advertising
ventures greatly exceed in numbers those who have made
money. This is because to all the ordinary risks of
business, the national advertiser adds a whole series of
risks over which he has comparatively little control.

First of all, the basis of his competition changes. He no
longer competes in production, but competes in advertising.
And as one advertising man puts it, "he will win or lose
primarily upon the strength and clarity of his argument, not
upon the virtues of his proposition." He may be producing a
first rate product, and so efficiently that he can offer a
good value, but if

241

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

he selects the wrong advertising manager, or the wrong
advertising agency, if his advertising plan and his copy are
not right, if the wrong mediums are selected or the space
used is inadequate, the effectiveness of his campaign may be
so reduced as to make him a loser in the competition with
other national advertisers in his line.

But equally important is the changed relationship which he
establishes with distributors. As a writer said on the
subject of "What To Do Before Advertising," in PBINTERS'
INK: "To prospective advertisers I can only say this: the
man who has only come into contact with his jobbing or
retail trade steps into an entirely new field when he begins
to advertise to the consumer. The sales arguments he has
been accustomed to become useless. He must create new ones
to meet new conditions."

The new sales arguments which he creates he addresses to the
consumer in his national advertising.

He no longer sells to the retailer. He has merely to arrange
with him for the handling of his product.

242

XXIV

THE ALTERNATIVE TO NATIONAL ADVERTISING

New recruits to national advertising are every day basing
their decision upon favorable opinions with regard to the
questions discussed previously.

Other manufacturers are every day basing their decisions not
to advertise nationally upon unfavorable opinions concerning
the same questions.

It is, however, possible for a manufacturer to decide
against national advertising because he deliberately adopts
an alternative policy.

This is the policy of frankly recognizing that the retailer,
under the competitive system, stands in relation to the
manufacturer and jobber as the representative of the
consumer, and that it is therefore the manufacturer's
business primarily to manufacturer and the retailer's
business primarily to sell. Such a policy is the exact re-
verse of that described in the last chapter, as the
manufacturer will win or lose on the virtues of his
proposition and not on the plausibility of the copy which is
addressed to the consumer by his advertising department.

243

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

If the manufacturer tries to sell the retailer on the merits
of his proposition, he will start talking about his
merchandise. He will have to sell the retailer on quality,
price and value. He will base his claims about the
resalability of his product for after all the retailer buys
only to resell upon the intrinsic worth of the merchandise
itself, and not on the consumer demand which may or may not
materialize from his national advertising.

He may not be able to sell his product to the retailer with
as great a margin for profit as that which the national
advertiser in his field secures.

But once he gets a customer, it is to that merchant's
interest to sell his product to the consumer rather than the
competing product of a national advertiser. This is certain
to be the case whenever a manufacturer, who does not
advertise, frankly recognizes that he must put into the mer-
chandise qualities which will plead his case more eloquently
than any amount of mere sales talk by his salesmen.

If he devotes his best thought to putting value into the
merchandise he manufactures, he not only holds the retailers
who are already his customers, but he will put into his
salesmen's hands cards which national advertisers cannot
trump so long as they continue selling their national
advertising rather than their merchandise to dealers.

In such selling as has been here described, the 244

VERSUS PROSPERITY

customer is of more importance than the sale. The sale
places the merchandise in the retailer's store, but the
merchandise itself must win or lose the customer for the
manufacturer.

This is not only true of the manufacturer in regard to the
retailer. It is also true of the retailer in regard to the
consumer.

But it is not true in the case of many nationally advertised
products. The national advertiser, of course, likes to hold
his retailers. But his hold upon them, if he is a successful
advertiser, is based upon his ability to sell and continue
selling the consumer through his advertising. His mer-
chandise is merely a convenient peg upon which to exercise
his advertising skill.

A PLATFORM FOB MANUFACTURER, RETAILER AND

CONSUMER

If I may be permitted, in an otherwise dignified discussion
to use a slangy, but very expressive word, I propose for
manufacturers, as an alternative policy to national
advertising, frank acceptance of a platform upon which the
manufacturer, retailer and consumer can all stand to-
gether. The first, and last and only plank in this platform
is: " Merchandise and no bunk."

In an age of high pressure salesmanship, business men are
prone to assume that no matter how good the merchandise, nor
how attractive the

245

NATIONAL ADVEBTISING

value, skillful and expensive selling machinery is
absolutely essential if merchandise is to be sold.

Emerson said that if a man makes a better mousetrap than any
other man, even though he lives in the woods, the world
would make a beaten path to his door.

Today we correct Emerson and say that if a man can advertise
his product more persuasively than any other man, the world
will make him rich beyond the dream of Croesus.

Yet it remains a fact that probably a hundred times as many
successes have been made by those manufacturers who produced
merchandise of such quality and value that retailers and
consumers did the advertising for them.

Advertising is at its best, a method of giving information.
Generally, however, it is a method of boasting or crowing.

Of all the forms of advertising, I attach the least respect
to national advertising because, except when it is used in
the announcement of a new product, it is almost of necessity
nothing much more than an artistic method of boasting.

If the definition of national advertising, trade advertising
and retail advertising with which this book begins, be
carefully studied, the reason for this will quickly become
apparent.

These classifications of advertising are unlike those in
common use, which generally classify it

246

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

by the type of medium used, because my definitions are based
upon the motive which underlies the advertising.

When we speak of newspaper advertising, magazine
advertising, billboard advertising, trade paper advertising,
street-car advertising, novelty advertising, we speak of
mediums of advertising rather than of advertising itself.

A national advertiser may use all of these mediums for the
purpose of doing national or consumer advertising.

A trade advertiser may use direct mail advertising, trade
paper advertising or newspaper advertising and, without
regard to the medium which he may use, still be doing trade
advertising.

A retail store may use circular advertising, street-car
advertising, newspaper advertising, and billboard
advertising, and still be doing retail advertising.

A mail-order house, or a retailer with a mailorder
department, may do magazine advertising and still be doing
retail advertising.

It is the end sought by the advertiser and not the means by
which he attains it that determines what kind of advertising
he is doing.

RELATION OF THE THKEE KINDS OP ADVERTISING TO MERCHANDISE

The natural objective of the retailer who ad247

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

vertises is customers. The merchandise he selects to
advertise is that which he believes is most apt to attract
customers to his store. His merchandising rather than his
advertising determines his success or failure.

The trade advertiser (when he is not also a national
advertiser) is almost entirely engaged in directing
attention to his merchandise. His advertising is essentially
an extension of the work of his salesmen, and enables him to
carry the story of his product to a wider audience than he
could otherwise reach, but an audience that is presumptively
capable of expert judgment about his merchandise.

In one noteworthy aspect the general run of retail
advertisements and trade advertisements are different from
national advertisements: retail and trade advertisements
generally deal specifically with the quality, price and
value of merchandise; national advertisements generally deal
with the conditions which can be brought about by the use of
the product.

The leading advocates of national advertising recognize the
danger of imposing upon the public with a system of selling
to the consumer, who is technically unable to pass judgment
on the merchandise and is persuaded to buy merchandise
primarily on the reputation of the advertiser.

248

VERSUS PEOSPERITY

They dismiss this as of little consequence on the ground
that advertising goods protects the consumer, and that
nothing can succeed through advertising unless the article
itself has merit.

249

XXV

SUCCESSFUL NATIONAL ADVERTISING

I have been trying in recent chapters to show two things:
Firstly, that sound business requires frank acceptance by
the manufacturer, retailer and consumer of a platform in
which "back to the merchandise" is the most important plank.
-Secondly, that manufacturers, retailers and consumers have
lost sight of the importance of healthy competition in
merchandise values in the bewildering battle of brands,
trademarks and labels.

What I have, in effect, been doing has been to criticise one
kind of advertising national or consumer advertising while
touching only incidentally upon the economic effects of
trade and retail advertising. I have criticised national ad-
vertising, because it differs in its economic consequences
from trade and retail advertising. It is necessary now to
show just how national advertising differs from these other
classes of advertising.

The economic consequences to retailers who distribute and
consumers who buy advertised

250

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

products is different in the case of products which are
successfully advertised and products which are nationally
advertised, but not successfully.

In the case of successfully advertised products, the
consumer accepts the claims and statements of the
advertiser, and asks for the advertised product. The
question of whether the price is right or wrong hardly
enters into the matter at all, because, if the advertising
succeeds in developing consumer acceptance, acceptance is
created with regard to price just as it is created with
regard to the product and its maker.

If the pressure is great enough, the national advertising of
the product is successful, and an appreciable consumer
demand is created, then there develops a pressure upon the
retailer for the particular product, and he is more or less
driven to stock it.

If the retailer places it in stock (rather than turn his
customers away), he enables the manufacturer to dictate to
him the basis upon which he shall buy and sell it. The price
at which he shall sell it, the margin of his profit, the
extent of the line he should carry, the way which he shall
advertise it all these matters which the self-respecting
merchant should determine for himself are assumed by the
manufacturer to the degree that the manufacturer is able to
create pressure upon the dealers.

251

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

If the consumer demand created for the advertised product is
resisted by the retailer, he is forced to expensive efforts
in selling and advertising his own merchandise to hold his
customers. Or he may be led, if a competitor already has the
advertised line, to stock some other advertised line. In
this way he meets the claim of his competitor about the
superiority of nationally advertised lines by offering his
own customers another line for which he claims a similar
superiority.

ft.

The accompanying diagram is a graphic presentation of the
flow of economic forces in the case of a successfully
advertised product. It is important to bear in mind that
this refers to the successful advertising' of the product
and not to

252

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

the success of the manufacturer of the product. Many
manufacturers who are successful in their business are
conducting unnecessary or even unprofitable national
advertising campaigns. They are successful in spite of their
national advertising not because of it.

In the diagram, the manufacturer conducts a successful "
national advertising " campaign to consumers. This is
indicated by the arrow moving from the manufacturer to the
consumer. As the advertising is successful a real " consumer
demand" develops. This is indicated by the arrow moving from
the consumer to the retailer. Pressure upon the retailer now
follows, and he is, other things being equal, certain to
turn to the manufacturer and stock the product in order to
keep his customers from going to other retailers who do
handle it. The manufacturer has thus succeeded in creating
an "artificial demand" for his product, and this is
indicated by the arrow moving from the retailer to the
manufacturer.

This is the "vicious" circle which lifts the successful
national advertiser outside of competition.

There are two possible criticisms of the reasoning
represented by this diagram which require consideration.
First, the criticism of those who may deny outright that any
amount of national advertising will produce the cycle of
developments

253

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

in the diagram; second, the criticism of those who may deny
that the demand thus created is artificial.

Can a manufacturer, through national advertising create
consumer demand sufficiently strong to put pressure upon the
retailer?

If he can do this, is the demand thus created an artificial
demand, the cost of creating which represents economic
waste!

I shall consider these two questions separately. The first
question I have already considered at length in the
discussion of the question of advertisability. Based upon
the argument then developed, I can answer it by saying that
a manufacturer can through national advertising create
consumer demand which will put pressure upon the retailer in
proportion to the advertisability of his product.

THE STOEY OF SOME HIGHLY ADVEBTISABLE PRODUCTS

If an article is low in advertisability, little pressure can
be created upon the dealer. But if it is high in
advertisability, it is almost unbelieveable to what extent
the manufacturer can reduce the retailer to a slot machine
which dares to refuse to vend his product only on peril of
losing trade and customers.

The Cuticura company makes three products 254

VERSUS PROSPERITY

an ointment, a soap and a talcum powder all of them readily
advertisable. Let me quote Charles L. Hamilton, the
president of the company, and let the story of what national
advertising can do with such highly advertisable products be
told in his own words:

"We have never had a salesman in our employ. Advertising has
brought us all the orders we have ever received from
dealers. Our sales department at the factory consists of one
woman who checks over the orders when they are received. We
do no direct mail advertising to the trade, we never run
special drives or weeks, we have no missionaries out working
other than our copy, and in fact, we do not even furnish
window displays or special signs. The only time we see our
customers is when they come to visit us at the laboratories.
Their orders are all received by mail.

"Practically every drug store in the country sells the
Cuticura products without any solicitation on our part. If a
druggist gets out of stock in our line, he simply loses that
much business to his neighbor, so he keeps enough on hand to
take care of the demand. The actual demand, not promises of
it, does our selling for us. We control our market by making
a standard trademarked product 'and advertising it instead
of letting our market control us."

255

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

ANOTHEB HIGHLY ADVEETISABLE PEODUCT

When Proctor & Gamble placed Crisco on the market and
started their national advertising of the new product, so
certain were they that the consumer demand would follow that
they anticipated the demand and sent six cans to grocers
free of charge. In a letter to the grocers concerning this
gift, they said:

"Our national advertising campaign on Crisco begins in
January, when large advertisements appear in practically all
of the leading magazines, especially in the household
publications which are so largely read by housekeepers.

"We want you to have Crisco in stock, so that you can supply
the first demand this advertising will create among your
customers. It will be big advertising and the magazines will
be read in several million families. You will have calls for
Crisco and so will every other grocer who sells to a good
family trade. Sell the six cans, and then order what further
supply you need from your jobber."

An interesting side-light which shows how confident they
were that the dealer would be under pressure to handle
Crisco is the following: The original plan fixed the
possible margins of the grocer on Crisco as follows: On one
case purchased, 16i% per cent.; on five cases, 17.22 per
cent., plus; on 10 cases, 17.77 per cent., plus.

256

VERSUS PEOSPEEITY

According to the Harvard School of Research and other
authorities, the average grocery store's cost of doing
business ranges around 18.91 per cent. Thus the biggest
purchaser of Crisco was prevented from making a legitimate
margin, right from the start. He was up against a stone
wall, for, remember, Crisco was advertised to the consumer
at a fixed price per can.

When the original price became known, a rebellion in the
trade followed. The grocers were up in arms at a proposition
which required them to handle a product on a margin less
than their cost of doing business. They were in effect being
forced to lessen their sales of butter and lard, two
products on which they made a profit, and substitute a new
one on which they might have to take a loss. The matter was
taken up by the grocery trade press, and the uproar was so
great that Proctor & Gamble realized they had fixed a price
to the retailer beyond what the traffic would bear, and they
changed their price so as to allow the grocers a margin of
from about 22 per cent, to about 23 per cent.

ARTIFICIAL DEMAND

If a manufacturer does, through national advertising create
a consumer demand for his product in proportion to the
advertisability of his product, is he creating an artificial
demand which

257

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

represents economic waste? An unnecessary waste of the time
and energy of people who might otherwise be engaged in
useful production, as well as dissipating natural resources
which might be used to add to the general welfare?

National advertising is generally something very different
from the definition of advertising to be found in the
dictionary: "To inform or apprise; to make known through the
press."

This was the idea of advertising in those days when the
merchant was content to print the fact of the receipt of a
shipment "of New Orleans molasses or of Scotch ginghams."

"Such a conception of advertising is now not only
inadequate, but false and misleading," says George French,
an advertising man whose ability would make him an ornament
in any profession, in his book, " Advertising. " "It is now
one of the minor functions of advertising to announce or
give notice. Its major function is to persuade."

Selling merchandise to the consumer by the use of national
advertising is selling merchandise in a very different way
from that of the merchants of a less strenuous time. Then
merchants used to assemble goods and await the demands of
the public. Both the makers and the storekeepers supplied
the necessities of the public, but permitted the public
itself to develop its own needs

258

VERSUS PROSPERITY

and propensities to purchase. Customers went to the stores
because necessities, rather than artificially created
desires, had developed in their lives. They bought goods
when their pantry shelves were emptied or their clothes were
worn out. The new things they bought were needed principally
to replace those which had been consumed.

The end sought through national advertising is the reverse
of that which the dictionary describes and that which still
forms the theme of most of the advertising of merchants
today. The object of national advertising is to create
desire. It ignores the question of the necessity for the
goods and tries only to succeed in persuading the public to
buy what it offers. At the best, the needs of the people
form but one of the smaller considerations in the plans of
the manufacturer who advertises. He bends his energies to
the task of persuading people to buy his trademarked goods,
and he has no occasion to concern himself about their
utility in economic life. He often not only manufacturers
the goods, but through his advertising, manufacturers the
demand for them. He creates, as George French says, a
necessity in the lives of the people that has no economic or
moral basis in fact.

Surely, if one of the ablest thinkers upon the subject of
advertising characterizes consumer de-

259

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

mand created by national advertising as having "no economic
or moral basis in fact," we may term the business created by
a manufacturer in this way as artificial demand.

260

XXVI

UNSUCCESSFUL NATIONAL ADVERTISING

Most national advertising campaigns are not successful.

By that I mean that irrespective of whether the manufacturer
may or may not happen to be successful, the advertising
campaign itself fails to create sufficient consumer demand
to result in the artificial demand described in the diagram
in the preceding chapter.

A manufacturer's national advertising campaign may fail in
this sense from any of the following three reasons:

1.  The advertising campaign is inadequate. The space used
    is too small; the mediums used too few in number; the
    frequency of insertion insufficient. The manufacturer is
    then like an ivory hunter who uses an air rifle to kill
    elephants. He may hit the mark, but his weapon does no
    damage to the elephant. He brings home no game.

2.  The advertising campaign is ineffective. The plan is
    wrong; the copy poor; the mediums used badly selected.
    He is then like a hunter

261

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

whose gun is powerful enough to kill elephants, but whose
marksmanship is so poor that he misses the animals, and so
brings home no game.

3.  The products he makes may not be sufficiently
    advertisable for successful national advertising. He is
    then like a hunter who may be equipped with a gun
    powerful enough to kill the elephants, and whose
    marksmanship may be perfect. But he shoots at a mark
    which he mistakenly assumes to be an elephant. In spite
    of the fact that he may hit the mark, and hit it hard
    enough to kill, he brings home no game.

Now in the case of national advertisers whose campaigns fall
into one of these three classes and are not successful
enough to create an appreciable consumer demand for their
products, what usually takes place f

Let us present the matter graphically. The first of these
two diagrams represents the manufacturer, the consumer, and
the retailer, with an arrow moving towards the consumer,
which shows the direction of the manufacturer's selling
effort with his national advertising campaign. He is at this
time actually advertising or committed to an advertising
campaign. He is confident; his agency is confident, and the
mediums he uses are confident that as a result of the
campaign, consumer demand will be created.

Of course many national advertising campaigns 262

VERSUS PROSPERITY

are launched in which the manufacturer, agency and mediums
are under no illusions as to their success in creating
consumer demand. They know that no appreciable consumer
effect will be created by them. These campaigns are in-

263

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

tended to fool wholesalers and retailers into stocking the
manufacturer's product; they serve principally as talking
points for the manufacturer's salesmen. Such campaigns are
certainly open to criticism on ethical grounds. Far too many
national advertising campaigns fall within this category.

From an economic or business standpoint, however, it makes
no difference whether a national advertising campaign fails
to create consumer demand by the deliberate insufficiency of
the advertising plan, or in spite of the mo'st earnest
efforts of the advertiser. Almost without exception, the
campaign is accompanied by the selling efforts on the part
of the manufacturer described in the second diagram.

The manufacturer in this diagram is directing his selling
effort in two directions; one toward the consumer, and the
other toward the retailer. As his national advertising fails
to create and appreciable consumer demand, what he and his
salesmen may say to retailers concerning it must be based
upon the fiction that it is creating or that it mil create
the demand.

What the manufacturer may say to the retailer concerning the
merchandise itself, may be the gospel truth. His merchandise
may be such that the retailer can readily sell it. But it
has nevertheless to carry the j burden of what he has

264

VERSUS PROSPERITY

expended upon national advertising, and what he says to the
retailer concerning the advertising campaign involves an
assumption of consumer demand which in this; case I call
fictitious demand. The portfolios containing beautiful
reproductions of the advertisements in the campaign; the
elaborate statistical estimates of the number of persons who
will see his advertising, and the supposed demand which will
clean the dealer's shelves, enabling the dealer to sell
product at a lower cost and to turn-over his stock more
readily, cannot 'alter the fact that it is the dealer 's
efforts which will have to sell the merchandise because the
talked of consumer demand is fictitious.

WHO PAYS FOR UNSUCCESSFUL, NATIONAL ADVERTISING?

When a manufacturer is an unsuccessful national advertiser,
unsuccessful, that is, in creating any appreciable consumer
demand for the product he advertises who pays for his
advertising?

In theory, the cost of national advertising is supposed to
be paid out of the increased profits and the lower costs of
production of the manufacturer. The national advertising is
supposed to increase the manufacturer's sales. A part of the
profits realized from the increased sales, he

265

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

is supposed to set aside to pay for the advertising. As he
is also supposed to manufacturer in larger volume (to meet
the increased demand), his production costs are presumably
lowered, and he is again supposed to set aside a portion of
the production savings to pay for the national ad-
vertising.

In theory, therefore, neither the consumer, retailer or
manufacturer pays for national advertising.

In practice, however, the theory is retained only for the
purpose of convincing skeptical but unfortunately seldom
very critical retailers that the manufacturer is not asking
them to pay for the national advertising.

If, for the purpose of argument, we concede the validity of
the theory, who pays for the advertising when the national
advertiser fails to create consumer demand?

In such cases, the whole elaborate theory falls to the
ground.

When the national advertising thus fails to create the
increased sales for the manufacturer (and it is increased
sales to which the theory assigns the roll of paying for
it), who pays for it? He has increased his selling cost by
going direct to the consumer; for some reason the consumer
failed to respond; how can he re-imburse himself for the
cost of his advertising? Plainly

266

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the cost of the advertising must be included somewhere in
the price at which the manufacturer sells it to the retailer
unless he is to take out of his profits and carry it as an
unproductive expense.

Obviously, in one form or another either the manufacturer or
the retailer will have to pay for the advertising.

The retailer, it is true, might make extraordinary efforts
to sell the advertised article at an advanced price to the
consumer, and then the cost of the national advertising
would be passed on to the consumer. But in the long run a
policy of "passing the buck" to the consumer, however
helpful to the manufacturer, would prove disastrous to the
merchant. Sooner or later the public would discover that the
merchant was asking too high a price for his merchandise.
Naturally the public would attach no special value to the
merchandise because it happened to be an advertised brand
since the national advertising had made no real impression
upon it.

It would turn to competing merchants who offered better
values, and the original retailer would be forced to dispose
of the remaining stocks of unsuccessfully advertised
articles at substantially the same price as other merchants
charged for other merchandise of the same grade. And if he
had paid a higher price because the manu-

267

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

facturer's salesman had made him believe that the fictitious
demand supposed to follow the national advertising would
help sell the goods at a sufficient margin of profit then
the retailer would be paying for the manufacturer's
advertising.

If the manufacturer is unable to sell to the retailer at a
price sufficient to yield him his average profit and to pay
for the advertising, then the manufacturer must pay for it.
His advertising appropriation either reduces his profits, or
causes him an actual loss. The longer he continues the
effort, the greater is the investment he makes in
advertising and the higher is the price he must ultimately
secure if he is to ever get back his investment. If his
product lacks advertisability and he tries long enough,
changing from one advertising plan to another in the hope of
finding one that will create a demand for his product, the
day is almost certain to come when the task of carrying the
cost of the advertising will break down the manufacturer.

268

XXVII

NORMAL MAEKETING

"To create, to control, to stimulate demand," in the words
of a writer upon national advertising, "for one or all of
these advertising is done."

Could anything more artificial be conceived than a demand
which must be first created by advertising and then kept
alive by continual advertising?

Is there any real economic need of creating demand?

Human needs alone are sufficient to create a natural demand
for a tremendous variety of essential products.

Human desires are boundless. They need no stimulation. It is
not a lack of advertising as much as a lack of means for
gratifying desires that checks the demand for refinements
and luxuries in food, clothing and furnishings. It is a
hundred times as important to any individual business man
that the possible consumers of the products he sells be
propserous enough to buy them, as that he create through
advertising an

269

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

artificial demand for the particular brands he sells.

"Good times" will dp more for business than all the
advertising which Croesus might do.

It is perfectly plain that national advertising is not
necessary to create demand that demand follows naturally as
a result of the existence of human needs and desires.

The difference between national advertising and trade and
retail advertising is the difference between the effort to
create and control demand and the effort to serve and supply
demand.

Of course, the word demand which is used twice in the above
statement is not used in exactly the same sense in both
instances.

When the average national advertiser speaks of creating and
maintaining demand, he really has in mind demand for a
particular brand of product which he alone can supply. He
has made an enormous investment in advertising; he secures a
return upon it if he is successful in his advertising by
virtue of the fact that he has a monopoly of fulfilling the
demand which his advertising creates.

The contrast between this kind of demand and the natural
demand, which exists because humanity exists and which
business seeks to serve and supply, is very great. If
uninfluenced by persistent advertising, natural demand
concentrates

270

VERSUS PROSPERITY

upon the merchandise which it needs or desires for its
satisfaction.

The safest and most efficient method of doing business is to
supply the merchandise for which there is a natural demand
in such qualities, at such prices and in such ways as to
bring buyers back for more.

The most dangerous and the most extravagant method of doing
business is to spend fortunes in national advertising to
persuade the consumer and then keep him persuaded, that the
mere attaching of an advertised label or trademark makes an
average product worth far more than other products of
identically the same grade.

NATURAL DEMAND

It is a profound economic truth and therefore a very
practical business fact, that human desires need almost no
artificial stimulation.

An accidental meeting of an acquaintance wearing a new dress
is sufficient to kindle the most intense desire for a new
dress in a woman.

Neither national advertising nor selling is needed to create
in that rara avis, the human being who owns no automobile, a
desire to own one. The first sight of an automobilist
annihilating distance and apparently traveling without ex-
ertion is all that is needed to kindle that desire in the
breast of any man.

271

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

Normal business can leave the matter of creating desire to
the ordinary day to day contacts of civilization, just as it
can leave the matter of " creating " the need for the
essentials of life to the ordinary day to day requirements
of nature. Men get hungry they need food. Men grow ragged
they need clothing. Men get cold and wet they need shelter.

In exactly the same natural way, to please their palates,
men desire the luxuries of eating; to satisfy pride, they
desire the refinements of dress, and to enjoy comfort and
satisfy social ambitions they desire beautiful homes.

Needs and desires such as these are the sources of what I
call natural demand.

The problem of normal business is the problem of supplying
this natural demand, while securing an adequate return or
profit upon the sale of the merchandise which it furnishes
to fulfill mankind's needs and desires.

Economically, desire is a different thing from demand.

Desire, as it has been used in this article, is plainly
unlimited.

Demand, however, develops only proportion to the ability of
consumers to gratify desire.

Let me make this very abstract proposition clearer by a
familiar illustration.

The desire to own automobiles is unlimited. 272

VERSUS PROSPERITY

If automobiles are priced at an average of \$5,000, the
demand for automobiles would be extremely limited. The
number of consumers able to gratify their desire to own
automobiles would then be so few that they created a very
limited demand for cars.

If automobiles are reduced in price, the number of consumers
able to gratify their desire to own cars would constantly
increase, and the demand would increase with them.

If cars can be bought for a matter of a few hundred dollars,
the demand is so great that the productive capacity of the
greatest factories the world has ever known cannot keep up
with it.

Henry Ford has built, perhaps, the greatest business of our
times I mean great in the sense of success in a highly
competitive field because the rock-bottom economics upon
which he built it was the supplying of natural demand. He
took it for granted that men wanted cars it was his concern
to make it possible for them to fulfill their desires. He
made money doing it. His dealers made money. And the public
desire was satisfied.

Here we see one of the most remarkable manufacturing
successes of industrial history built by a man who conducted
his business in such a manner as to profit from natural
demand. And

273

NATIONAL ADVEBTISING

national advertising was not needed to achieve this success.

In the very beginning of the industrial revolution when the
maker of a product was a maker first and foremost and a
seller only incidentally the actual marketing of a factory's
product was the work of the owner, or one of the owners, of
the business.

There was literally no selling expense. Selling was simply
an incident in the work of the manufacturer and the time
whch he devoted to selling scarcely interfered with his
superintendence of production.

This stage was immediately followed by the stage in which
the manufacturer relied upon traveling salesmen to dispose
of his product. The manufacturer's representatives furnished
the factory a natural method of marketing its products when
the number of outlets became too numerous for the
manufacturer to cover personally.

As the number of items made by a factory increased, price
lists and catalogs put in their appearance. The catalog was
probably the first trade advertisement.

Then came circulars, form letters all kinds of direct
"trade" advertising and trade paper advertising.

274

VERSUS PROSPERITY

Trade advertising is essentially a device for carrying the
manufacturer's announcements and messages to the trade
through printed matter. It serves to supplement in some few
cases it is a substitute for the work of the salesmen. Fre-
quently it is incomplete salesmanship, since trade
advertisers do not generally undertake to get orders
directly in response to their advertising. In its most
extreme form, however, it only does through the medium of
the printed word what salesmen do by word of mouth.

When the manufacturer is not a national advertiser, it is
principally used to direct the attention of the trade to the
merchandise which is being offered to it.

When a national advertiser uses trade advertising, his trade
advertising, like his salesmanship, puts more emphasis upon
the national advertising of his merchandise than upon his
merchandise itself.

The accompanying diagram makes this very plain. The
manufacturer uses trade advertising as he uses a salesman
for the purpose of telling the story of his merchandise to
the distributor to whom he sells. The arrow " trade adver-
tising" in the diagram, which moves from the manufacturer to
the retailer, might just as well be called " selling and
trade advertising. " Eco-

275

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

nomically so long as the manufacturer is not a national
advertiser they are one and the same thing.

They both direct the attention of the retailer 276

VERSUS PROSPERITY

to the merchandise offered by the manufacturer.

Consideration of whether or not the merchandise itself will
supply a natural demand of his customers should determine
the retailer in buying merchandise.

Trade advertising, unlike national advertising, leaves the
merchandise itself as the supreme factor in the retailer \*s
decision.

In the same way that manufacturers with their trade
advertising utilize printed matter to supplement the work of
salesmen, retailers use the printed word to inform their
customers about the merchandise they have on sale.

Retail advertising, like trade advertising, is essentially
the effort of a merchant to secure from the public
consideration for his merchandise selections.

The retailer knows that his customers will buy things they
need and desire that they will buy new clothing, new
furnishings, new dry goods, new furniture. He tries to
supply them these things in the qualities and at the prices
that will hold his trade.

Retail advertising is simply a method he uses to get news of
his offerings to consumers in his community. And in
consequence, shoppers consult the retail advertisements in
the daily newspapers to learn whether the retailers they
usually

277

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

patronize have anything special to offer, either in novelty
or in price, on the merchandise they are ready to buy.

The retail advertisements have the same importance to the
housewife that the market reports have to a speculator. They
guide her in her buying.

In the diagram the arrow "Retail Advertising" represents the
effort of the retailer to market the merchandise he has
assembled in his store.

Necessities drive and desires lead the consumers in his
community to buy. If the merchandise itself is right right
in quality and in price the potential buyers become actual
buyers and " natural demand" flows, as indicated by the
arrow in the diagram, from the consumer through the retailer
and jobber and so to the ultimate producer.

At every step in the movement of merchandise, whether from
manufacturer to wholesaler, from wholesaler to retailer, or
from retailer to consumer, the one way in which each factor
in the movement can hold the natural demand is by supplying
the right merchandise.

No amount of trade advertising or retail advertising can, by
itself, enable an advertiser to get outside of competition
or away from the merchandise he is trying to sell.

278

XXVIII

COMPETITION AND THE THREE CLASSES OF ADVERTISERS

Competition between national advertisers results in the
distribution of business between the manufacturers in
proportion to the effectiveness of their advertising.

Competition between trade advertisers results in the
distribution of business among manufacturers in proportion
to the effectiveness of their manufacturing.

The significant difference between the national advertiser
and the trade advertiser is that one addresses himself to
buyers who have no technical knowledge of the goods, while
the other addresses himself to buyers whose business it is
to judge the technical merits of the products they handle.

It is today possible for a manufacturer to convince the
general public through national advertising that a certain
trademarked product is worth more than its value as
merchandise because the public is systematically kept in
ignorance of the real grade and nature of the merchandise
advertised.

279

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

But it is impossible for a manufacturer, no matter how
effective his trade advertising may be, to sell to retailers
except on the basis of the real merits of his product.

TRADE ADVERTISING AND COMPETITION

The trade advertiser (unless he is also a national
advertiser), has fundamentally only one story to tell that
is the story of his merchandise.

No matter how much he may increase the amount of his trade
advertsing, and no matter how many mediums he may use, he
succeeds or fails, as every business man should, upon the
merits of the product he has to sell. An increase in the
amount of his trade advertising should increase the volume
of his sales by increasing the number of accounts to which
he sells, just as an addition to his sales force should
produce the same result. But it would not result in any
changes in the basis upon which individual sales were made,
unless the demand for his merchandise is so great that
buyers bid against one another to get the goods. And to
produce such a result, the trade advertiser's merchandise
itself must first of all be conspicuously above all com-
peting merchandise for a number of years.

The trade advertiser, who does not rely upon national
advertising to make his merchandise acceptable to the
public, has confidence that the

280

VERSUS PROSPERITY

quality of his product and the margin which he makes it
possible for the retailer to earn, will get him his share of
business.

The fact that he is a trade advertiser no more than the fact
that he has salesmen can not enable him to get outside of
the competition of other manufacturers in his line. But if
he does produce the merchandise which by its own value
creates customers for the retailers who may stock it, then
he gets above competition at a small fraction of the cost
and with none of the hazards of a national advertising
campaign.

EETAIL ADVERTISING AND COMPETITION

There are hundreds of thousands of retail stores in the
country. Comparatively few of these stores would escape
Sheriff's sales if they depended upon the trade of
transients for their support.

Some of the retail stores located in cities like New York
and Chicago, which cater to the endless streams of visitors
to the cities, may be dependent upon transients for a good
share of their support. But the volume of business which
they do is a very small part of all the sales made at retail
by stores which cater to a regular trade.

That the average grocer, butcher, and baker sells to
customers who buy regularly from them

281

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

is obvious, because these customers are apt to visit them
almost daily.

It should not be forgotten that clothing stores, furniture
stores, department stores in fact stores of all kinds also
sell to regular customers, in spite of the fact that their
customers may not visit them so often, and in spite of the
fact that in some cases they may divide their trading among
a number of stores in the same line.

A regular customer of John Wanamaker, New York, may also be
a regular customer of B. Altman & Co. These two department
stores may divide between themselves almost the entire pur-
chase of that customer, in their lines. Stern Bros, and Lord
& Taylor may in the same way divide the trade of another
customer of about the same class as the customer who
patronizes the previous two stores. Whether they divide the
trade with one or more of their competitors, or whether they
get all the trade of a customer, it is always supremely
important for them to maintain their hold upon their
customers.

Competition between retailers is really a sort of battle to
secure customers.

If a grocer secures a customer, he really wins the
opportunity to supply that customer with what she needs in
the way of groceries day after day. If she spends \$50 a
month for groceries he will sell her, in the course of the
month, sugar,

282

VERSUS PROSPERITY

coffee, butter, eggs, canned goods, and so on, to that
amount. Jt will matter very little to him what she buys on
any given day. If she buys sugar one day, he knows that she
will buy coffee on another day. Over a considerable period
of time, he can figure that he will make upon his sales to
her his average margin for profit.

In speaking of the value of a customer to a store, as
contrasted with a single-time purchaser, Mr. Harry Kirtland,
of the The Kirtland Co., Toledo, Ohio, present the following
figures, obtained from a study of a large number of stores
in each of the lines mentioned:

In a year's time the average customer of a clothing store
buys \$85 worth of merchandise; in a large department store,
\$362; in a cloak and suit house, \$236; in a shoe store,
\$35 to \$68, depending upon whether the customer is single
or the head of a large family; in a furniture store, \$87
(setting aside young couples outfitting their first home).

Out of a large list of retail stores chosen for test, it was
found that the average store holds 85 per cent, of its trade
during a year, and loses 15 per cent., for a variety of
reasons, divided as follows: out of 100 lost customers in a
group of Iowa stores, 68 stopped buying because of in-
difference on the part of employees; 9 because of price or
service advantages elsewhere; 3 due to

283

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

moving out of the trade territory; 14 because of unadjusted
grievances; 5 on account of influence of friends and 1 dead
or unaccounted for. The stores gained on an average of 15 to
25 per cent. , of new trade.

THE OBJECT OF RETAIL ADVERTISING

A retail store is a place at which a number of people
regularly supply certain of their needs and desires. The
retailer assembles for them a stock of goods. Whether his
customers buy one maker's goods, or another maker's, means
little to the retailer in comparison with their continued
buying what they need in his line from him.

These facts, of course, exercise a great influence over
everything which retailers do.

They profoundly affect the results which are secured by them
from retail advertising.

Retail advertising is at the bottom an effort to secure
customers. What retailers advertise and the way in which
they advertise proves this conclusively. They advertise
their latest offerings, their best purchases, their greatest
values.

If they secure the customers they sell not only the things
they advertise, but they have the opportunity to supply
these customers with all their requirements in their line.
What make or kind of merchandise the retail advertiser sells
the

284

VERSUS PROSPERITY

first time is a matter of indifference to him provided the
value and service is such that he makes a customer, because
every customer means for him his average profit on what that
customer buys from him over a long period of time.

NATIONAL ADVERTISING AND COMPETITION

No amount of trade advertising will lift a manufacturer
outside of competition, because the trade is influenced by
the merchandise itself rather than by what the manufacturer
says about it.

No amount of retail advertising will lift a merchant outside
of competition, because his success is based not upon the
particular merchandise he advertises so much as the number
of customers which he can serve as a result of his
advertising.

The trade advertiser must rely upon his skill as a
manufacturer for his success, just as the retail advertiser
must rely upon his skill in merchandising for his success.
Their advertising may enlarge their opportunities for
selling may increase their volume of business but it does
not change the basis upon which they do their business. If
they succeed in getting above competi- tion succeed in
securing a position which no competitor disturbs it is
because of their preeminence as manufacturers and merchants
and not as advertisers.

285

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

National advertising is radically different from trade and
retail advertising, because unlike these two kinds of
advertising, it is not addressed to those to whom the
advertiser sells his product.

National advertising is addressed to consumers, but the
national advertisers themselves sell to distributors. The
success of the national advertiser depends upon what he can
persuade or force distributors to do, because of what he has
said to consumers. His product is only an incidental element
in his success. He does not sell the distributors his
product he sells them the demand for his brand, label or
trademark. And of the advertised product he is the sole
source of supply.

If it were not for the national advertising, the good will
which attached to his trademark would have to come from the
merits of his product. It would be subject to the
competition!" of other makers of the same product. But once
his product is nationally advertised, the good will no
longer rises from the product and is subject only to the
competition of other national advertisers of the same
product.

Competition between manufacturers as to the product itself
results in better values.

Competition between manufacturers as to the national
advertising of a product results in poorer values.

286

VERSUS PROSPERITY

The trade advertiser gives the distributor values because he
cannot get away from the competition of other makers as to
the product itself.

The national advertiser gives the trade poorer values not
merely because he has to add the cost the advertising to his
product. The cost of the advertising may be an insignificant
sum when prorated on some products. He gives the trade
poorer values because, if his advertising is successful, it
enables him to base his prices on what the traffic will
bear.

National advertising and retail advertising are both
addressed to the consumers. But the economic power which it
gives to the two kinds of advertisers is very different.

The national advertiser may, or may not, ask a higher price
from the consumer for his product. He generally does
persuade the consumer to pay more. But whether he takes
advantage of his power to secure this or not, he has the
power to raise the price of his product to the retailer in
proportion to the demand created by the advertising.

Retail advertising gives the retailer no such power as this.
No matter how effective it may be, it never enables the
retailer to get outside of competition as to the merits of
his merchandise and merchandising. The retailer who
advertises

287

NATIONAL ADVEETISING

talks to consumers, but he lives and prospers by his success
in giving his customers merchandise which holds their trade.

The manufacturer who advertises talks to consumers, but his
success depends upon his ability in selling retailers the
demand which he has created for his trademark.

288

XXIX

MANUFACTUEING AND MABKETINO

As I write, I have before me a copy of a full page
advertisement which is being published in most of our
popular magazines. The advertisement is selling a course in
salesmanship. The leading illustration shows a salesman
talking to a man sitting at a desk. Underneath is the fol-
lowing caption:

1 ' Every one is a salesman of goods or ideas. Your talk
nothing else is what counts in selling."

No more false statement has ever been made in any
advertisement. Yet it probably came naturally enough to the
writer of the copy. What is worse, he probably believes that
it is true. He probably has never stopped to ask himself
whether it is true. He has merely accepted without thought
the prevailing belief that our selling talk, our advertising
nothing else is what makes for success.

So many selling miracles have been performed through the use
of advertising trade advertising, retail advertising,
national advertising that a

289

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

manufacturer ambitious for expansions, who is considering
the use of advertising in the hope that he might be in the
beneficiary of similar miracles, ought to do some
cold-blooded thinking on the subject.

I am anxious in reviewing, from the standpoint of the
manufacturer, what I have written upon this aspect of the
subject, to impress upon manufacturers the importance of
analyzing national advertising successes to learn to what
extent they are really successful through the play of
economic forces, and to what extent they are successful
through the play of psychological or selling forces.

For instance, a keen student of the clothing field, whose
familiarity with it dates back more than a quarter of a
century, insists that the successes of the outstanding
national advertiser in the field is due not to their policy
of national advertising, but to their manufacturing and
merchandising efficiency in their early days. More
manufacturers of clothing have taken flyers in national
advertising as a result of the belief that this firm owes
its success to its advertising than for all other reasons
combined. Yet it is an indisputable fact that this great
national advertiser first secured its trade outlets by
setting the pace in giving clothiers better values. Today it
no longer sets the pace in this respect. It uses

290

VERSUS PROSPERITY

the prestige of its national advertising as the force with
which to sustain its momentum. Efficiency in advertising has
become a substitute for efficiency in value giving.

I am perfectly willing to concede that under present
conditions of over-capacity for production that the
marketing of his product profitably is the problem of
problems for the manufacturer. But I insist that marketing
begins not when the product is finished, but while it is
being made. A product rightly made right in workmanship, in
material, in quality, in design and in cost is more than
half sold. As a matter of fact, retailers go to almost as
much trouble to find makers of products of this character as
many manufacturers go to find retailers who will buy
products which lack it.

The safest and most efficient method for a manufacturer to
market his product is to supply a product for which there is
a natural demand in such qualities, at such prices and in
such ways as to bring retailers back for more.

Retailers will come back to such manufacturers for more with
almost no selling effort on the part of manufacturers if the
product meets two requirements: Satisfies their customers,
and enables them to make an ample margin for profit. The
response of retailers to the selling efforts of such
manufacturers whether the manufac-

291

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

turers use trade advertising or salesmanship has resulted in
marketing successes that rival anything accomplished through
national advertising.

And these successes have involved only a fraction of the
financial outlay of a national advertising effort and none
of the hazard of making the retailers to whom the
manufacturer had been selling, indifferent or hostile to the
product because it is nationally advertised.

Two factors determine the response of retailers to a
manufacturer's product when the product is offered them
solely and simply as merchandise:

First, the extent to which it attracts customers satisfied
customers and brings back customers for more of the product.

Second, the margin of profit which it permits the retailer,
if the retailer sells it to the consumer so as to meet all
normal competition.

It is plain that any manufacturer who wishes to market his
products in accordance with these factors has first of all a
problem in manufacturing to solve.

The extent of his success will be determined mainly by his
efficiency and ability in design and production.

The more efficient he is, the more his product embodies the
two factors above described, the greater efforts will
retailers make in pushing and

advertising his product. The most powerful ele-

292

VERSUS PROSPERITY

ments in distribution the element which comes into direct
touch with the consumer, which influences him by personal
contact at the time of purchase works in favor of such a
manufacturer. Few business men fully appreciate the fact
that this element the retailers has built up an enormous
consumer demand for trademarked products, the manufacturers
of which never spent a cent in consumer advertising.

THE TWO AIMS OF RATIONAL ADVEKTISING

When a manufacturer undertakes to establish a market for his
product by urging consumers, through national advertising,
to ask for his brand, or label, or package, these factors
"fade out" of the picture altogether. He can aim his
national advertising in either of two directions: Either to
actually create consumer demand, and thus force retailers
into stocking his product, or purely to " impress " the
retailers and thus fool them into stocking it.

I know of cases where manufacturers used \$10,000
advertisements in national mediums solely to impress
retailers and with not the slightest real expectation that
the advertising would move the goods out of the retailers'
stores.

After the goods were once in, it was the retailer who had
the difficult job of moving the over-priced product out.

293

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

Some of the manufacturers whose advertising campaigns were
aimed in this direction are still "putting it over." Some of
them, however, no longer have any advertised product to "put
over." What Lincoln said is something that should be
pondered by every manufacturer who thinks of spending money
in national advertising to impress or rather, to fool
retailers.

A national advertiser may fool all of the retailers some of
the time. He may fool some of the retailers all the time.
But if he thinks he can fool all of the retailers all of the
time, he is apt only to fool himself,

THE THREE HAZARDS OP NATIONAL. ADVERTISING

Now, suppose we review the manufacturer's problem who
considers marketing of his product by creating a real
consumer demand through advertising.

He must first of all discount three hazards: First, the
hazard of antagonizing and losing his existing accounts. If
he sells to jobbers, the jobbers are almost certain to cease
any real effort in favor of this product, even if they do
not actually strive to push some other product in pref-
erence to it. If he sells to retailers, he is certain to
have to re-sell his product to all of them. Most of the work
of accumulating accounts which may

294

VERSUS PROSPERITY

have represented decades of effort will count for nothing.

Second, the financial hazard. From the very beginning of the
national advertising era the cost of an advertising campaign
which finally succeeds in creating consumer demand has been
so large as to represent a financial hazard of the first
magnitude. But today, with the consumer being assailed by a
hundredfold as many national advertisements, the
effectiveness of each advertisement is so much less that the
size and frequency must be much greater if real demand is to
be created. And at the same time the cost of adver- tising
in all the effective mediums has greatly increased. National
advertising always involved a financial hazard. Today that
hazard is much greater. It is in many cases an economic
folly when so many less wasteful methods of marketing are
available.

Third, the hazard as to the advertisability of the
manufacturer's product.

It has been shown that the greatest hazard of a manufacturer
who undertakes to market his product by national advertising
has to do with the question of whether his product has
sufficient advertisability to make consumer advertising pay.
For the extent to which consumer demand for

295

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

a product can be created through national advertising is
determined by the degree of advertisability of the product.

Four factors principally determine the advertisability of
products:

First, the margin for profit between bare manufacturing cost
and the price which the consumer can be persuaded to pay.
The higher a product is in this factor, the greater is its
advertisability.

Second, the frequency with which the consumer has occasion
to purchase the product. The more frequently a product is
purchased, the easier is the work of persuading a sufficient
number of consumers to purchase it.

Third, the variability of the consideration which determines
the consumer in purchasing a product. The greater the
variability, the more difficult is the problem of
advertising a product. When the variability is extreme, as
in women's styles, it is almost impossible to successfully
advertise a product no matter how advertisable it may be in
other respects.

Fourth, the extent to which the retailer determines the
consumer's choice. The greater the degree of influence of
the retailer, the less advertisable is the product.

SPECIALIZED STAPLES

It is plain that ordinary staples which still

296 '

VERSUS PROSPERITY

comprise the bulk of the sales in many lines of retailing,
do not readily lend themselves to national advertising.

On the other hand, those specialties which are pure
novelties, are not high in advertisability in spite of the
high margins of profit, because of the great variability of
the demand for them.

The greatest amount of national advertising has been done
with what might be called specialized staples. By taking a
staple product and making it appear different or emphasizing
some peculiarity in its method of manufacturer, it is
possible to increase the margin of profit sufficiently to
make the national advertising of it possible.

This has resulted in very heavy national advertising to
consumers by the industries whose products were high in
advertisability.

The successful national advertisers in these industries make
enormous profits out of their ability to persuade the public
to pay luxury prices for their specialized staples. To the
extent to which they succeed in diverting the expenditures
of consumers to their own products, they reduce the field of
sale for all other products.

This process benefits only the successful national
advertiser and the advertising industry the paper makers,
printers, publishers, agencies, etc.

It demoralizes wholesaling. Wholesalers in 297

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

self-defense enter manufacturing and establish private
brands, perhaps becoming national advertisers themselves, or
enter retailing so as to insure outlets on the products
which they sell.

It makes the work of the retailer more difficult and costly,
and less profitable to himself. It multiplies the number of
brands he carries if he would meet all the demands of his
customers. Thus it increases his stock and reduces his turn-
over. It leads him to unconsciously substitute specialized
staples for the staples he would otherwise sell. Thus he
increases his sales of nationally advertised products on
which the manufacturer allows him little profit at the very
time that he reduces his sales of products on which he had
made a normal profit.

Finally, it involves a species of charlatanism in persuading
the public that the advertised virtues of the product make
the product worth all that the advertiser can get for it.
Once the public has been persuaded to assume this state of
mind, the product is lifted out of ordinary competition, and
the national advertiser can fix the price to consumer, to
jobber and to retailer at whatever figure will in his
opinion give him the highest net profit.

298

XXX

THE FUTURE OF NATIONAL ADVERTISING

There is not the slightest doubt that for some time to come
the volume of national advertising will increase year by
year.

The national advertisers now in the field will have to
increase their appropriations every year, or fall behind in
the race for consumer favor. Even to continue to use the
same mediums in the future to the same extent as they do at
present requires a greater appropriation every year because
of the recurrent rises in the advertising rates of the
mediums. And of course, with the annual increase in the
number of national advertisers, those already in the field
must advertise more heavily to maintain their present
position in the public eye. This is one reason why na-
tional advertisers who secure results in the beginning with
quarter and half -pages, find it necessary to use full
-pages and "double-trucks" a few years later.

But the greater part of the increase in national advertising
will undoubtedly continue to come from the ranks of
manufacturers newly converted

299

NATIONAL ADVERTISING

to the theory of marketing their products by direct appeal
to the consumers.

Most of the new recruits will be unsuccessful. But these
will cover up their failure to create consumer demand for
their product by the approved method of inducing the
retailers to pull their chestnuts out of the fire.

A few of the annual crop of newcomers will be successful,
and will persuade the public to pay luxury prices for their
specialized staple. They will add one more brand to the
multitude which already makes the life of the retailer a
burden.

THE POWERS WHICH MAY TEANSFOEM NATIONAL ADVERTISING

Two economic powers may ultimately transform national
advertising. One is the ultimate consumer. The other is the
new merchant the merchant of the future rather than the
present.

A revolt of the consumer a sort of "buyer's strike" directed
against brands, labels, trademarks and packages which are
overpriced would make national advertising unprofitable to
the advertisers. An awakening of the consumers to the manner
in which national advertisers exploit their psychological
weaknesses would make them suspect advertised products. All
national advertising would then have "reverse English," as
they say in billiards, and the more heavily a prod-

300

VERSUS PROSPERITY

uct was advertised, the more carefully would the public
study it and make certain that it was worth the price asked
for it.

The possibility of a consumer revolt is remote. The
principal organs of information for the consumers the
magazines and newspapers are certainly not going to urge the
public to an intelligent thrift in buying.

But that the merchants of the country will awaken to the
menace of slot-machine retailing is more than a possibility
it is a very imminent probability. Many of the large
retailers the department stores, the mail order houses, the
chain stores have already seen the light. Some of the
smaller retailers ( small in comparison with the others),
notably the clothiers, are studying the merchandising of
their lines with the deliberate intention of freeing
themselves from handicaps imposed by national advertisers in
their line.

WHAT MAY SET THESE POWERS IIST MOTION

These two economic powers may ultimately render national
advertising impotent.

What are the chances that they will actually do what they
have power to do?

A period of prolonged "hard times" and of bad business would
undoubtedly set these powers in motion. Hard times force
consumers to be thrifty. Necessity is a great educator.
Extrav-

301

NATIONAL ADVEKTISINO

agantly marketed products, such as the nationally advertised
products, would suffer irretrievably if the consumers' need
of being thrifty was sufficiently prolonged to really
educate them in buying. With consumers seeking "values" in
what they buy not necessarily " bargains " the slot-machine
retailer would lose in competition with the merchant who
knew merchandise.

There is small solace, however, in the knowledge that the
high-pressure marketing of products would disappear in a
period of misfortune. To hope for such a development is too
much like anticipating a process of " deflation " to cure
excessive speculation.

Fortunately, there is another business force which may set
both retailers and consumers in motion.

If the manufacturers who are not national advertisers awaken
to the need of educating the retailers to the possibilities
of selling merchandise, rather than brands; if these
manufacturers take the aggressive instead of the defensive
in competing with the national advertisers; if they utilize
the comparatively inexpensive, yet highly efficient, means
now available to them in reaching retailers salesmen, trade
advertising, merchandise fairs, direct advertising it would
not be long before retailers would grasp at the
possibilities of profit and self-respect offered them.

302

VERSUS PROSPERITY

And if these manufacturers educated a sufficient number of
retailers, the retailers would attend to the education of
the public.

When I think of the powers which the retailer really
possesses his direct contact with his customers; his
advertising to which the consumer looks as news there is
little doubt in my mind that he can, if he will, eliminate
the contribution of national advertising to the rise in the
cost of distribution.

THE END
