My dear Crosby:---I am very glad to hear of your activity
and that it is beginning to attract attention. Fifty years
ago Garrison's proclamation of non-resistance only cooled
people toward him, and the whole fifty years' activity of
Ballou in this direction was met with stubborn silence. I
read with great pleasure in *Peace* the beautiful ideas of
the American authors in regard to non-resistance. I make an
exception only in the case of Mr. Bemis's old, unfounded
opinion, which calumniates Christ in assuming that Christ's
expulsion of the cattle from the temple means that he struck
the men with a whip, and commanded his disciples to do
likewise.

The ideas expressed by these writers, especially by H.
Newton and G. Herron, are beautiful, but it is to be
regretted that they do not answer the question which Christ
put before men, but answer the question which the so-called
orthodox teachers of the churches, the chief and most
dangerous enemies of Christianity, have put in its place.

Mr. Higginson says that the law of non-resistance is not
admissible as a general rule. H. Newton says that the
practical results of the application of Christ's teaching
will depend on the degree of faith which men will have in
this teaching. Mr. C Martyn assumes that the stage at which
we are is not yet suited for the application of the teaching
about non-resistance. G. Herron says that in order to fulfil
the law of non-resistance, it is necessary to learn to apply
it to life. Mrs. Livermore says the same, thinking that the
fulfilment of the law of non-resistance is possible only in
the future.

All these opinions treat only the question as to what would
happen to people if all were put to the necessity of
fulfilling the law of non-resistance; but, in the first
place, it is quite impossible to compel all men to accept
the law of non-resistance, and, in the second, if this were
possible, it would be a most glaring negation of the very
principle which is being established. To compel all men not
to practise violence against others! Who is going to compel
men?

In the third place, and above all else, the question, as put
by Christ, does not consist in this, whether non-resistance
may become a universal law for all humanity, but what each
man must do in order to fulfil his destiny, to save his
soul, and do God's work, which reduces itself to the same.

The Christian teaching does not prescribe any laws for all
men; it does not say, "Follow such and such rules under fear
of punishment, and you will all be happy," but explains to
each separate man his position in the world and shows him
what for him personally results from this position. The
Christian teaching says to each individual man that his
life, if he recognizes his life to be his, and its aim, the
worldly good of his personality or of the personalities of
other men, can have no rational meaning, because this good,
posited as the end of life, can never be attained, because,
in the first place, all beings strive after the goods of the
worldly life, and these goods are always attained by one set
of beings to the detriment of others, so that every separate
man cannot receive the desired good, but, in all
probability, must even endure many unnecessary sufferings in
his struggle for these unattained goods; in the second
place, because if a man even attains the worldly goods,
these, the more of them he attains, satisfy him less and
less, and he wishes for more and more new ones; in the third
place, mainly because the longer a man lives, the more
inevitably do old age, diseases, and finally death, which
destroys the possibility of any worldly good, come to him.

Thus, if a man considers his life to be his, and its end to
be the worldly good, for himself or for other men, this life
can have for him no rational meaning. Life receives a
rational meaning only when a man understands that the
recognition of his life as his own, and the good of
personality, of his own or of that of others, as its end, is
an error, and that the human life does not belong to him,
who has received this life from some one, but to Him who
produced this life, and so its end must not consist in the
attainment of his own good or of the good of others, but
only in the fulfilment of the will of Him who produced it.
Only with such a comprehension of life does it receive a
rational meaning, and its end, which consists in the
fulfilment of God's will, become attainable, and, above all,
only with such a comprehension does man's activity become
clearly denned, and he no longer is subject to despair and
suffering, which were inevitable with his former
comprehension.

"The world and I in it," such a man says to himself, "exist
by the will of God. I cannot know the whole world and my
relation to it, but I can know what is wanted of me by God,
who sent men into this world, endless in time and space, and
therefore inaccessible to my understanding, because this is
revealed to me in the tradition, that is, in the aggregate
reason of the best people in the world, who lived before me,
and in my reason, and in my heart, that is, in the striving
of my whole being.

"In the tradition, the aggregate of the wisdom of all the
best men, who lived before me, I am told that I must act
toward others as I wish that others should act toward me; my
reason tells me that the greatest good of men is possible
only when all men will act likewise.

"My heart is at peace and joyful only when I abandon myself
to the feeling of love for men, which demands the same. And
then I can not only know what I must do, but also the cause
for which my activity is necessary aDd defined.

"I cannot grasp the whole divine work, for which the world
exists and lives, but the divine work which is being
accomplished in this world and in which I am taking part
with my life is accessible to me. This work is the
destruction of the discord and of the struggle among men and
other beings, and the establishment among men of the
greatest union, concord, and love; this work is the
realization of what the Jewish prophets promised, saying
that the time will come when all men shall be taught the
truth, when the spears shall be forged iuto pruning-hooks,
and the scythes and swords into ploughshares, and when the
Hon shall lie with the lamb."

Thus the man of the Christian comprehension of life not only
knows how he must act in life, but also what he must do.

He must do what contributes to the establishment of the
kingdom of God in the world. To do this, a man must fulfil
the inner demands of God's will, that is, he must act
amicably toward others, as he would like others to do to
him. Thus the inner demands of a man's soul coincide with
that external end of life which is placed before him.

And here though we have an indication which is so clear to a
man of the Christian comprehension, and incontestable from
two sides, as to what the meaning and end of human life
consists in, and how a man must act, and what he must do,
and what not, there appear certain people, who call
themselves Christians, who decide that in such and such
cases a man must depart from God's law and the common cause
of life, which are given to him, and must act contrary to
the law and the common cause of life, because, according to
their ratiocination, the consequences of the acts committed
according to God's law may be profitless and disadvantageous
for men.

Man, according to the Christian teaching, is God's workman.
The workman does not know his master's whole business, but
the nearest aim to be attained by his work is revealed to
him, and he is given definite indications as to what he
should do; especially definite are the indications as to
what he must not do, in order that he may not work against
the aim for the attainment of which he was sent to work. In
everything else he is given complete liberty. And so for a
man who has grasped the Christian conception of life the
meaning of his life is clear and rational, and he cannot
have a moment of wavering as to how he should act in life
and what he ought to do, in order to fulfil the destiny of
his life.

According to the law given him in the tradition, in his
reason, and in his heart, a man must always act toward
another as he wishes to have done to him: he must contribute
to the establishment of love and union among men; but
according to the decision of these far-sighted people, a man
must, while the fulfilment of the law, according to their
opinion, is still premature, do violence, deprive of
liberty, kill people, and with this contribute, not to union
of love, but to the irritation and enrage ment of people. It
is as though a mason, who is put to do certain definite
work, who knows that he is taking part with others in the
building of a house, and who has received a clear and
indubitable command from the master himself that he is to
lay a wall, should receive the command from other masons
like him, who, like him, do not know the general plan of the
structure and what is useful for the common work, to stop
laying the wall, and to undo the work of the others.

Wonderful delusion! The being that breathes to-day and
disappears to-morrow, that has one definite, incontestable
law given to him, as to how he is to pass his short term of
life, imagines that he knows what is necessary and useful
and appropriate for all men, for the whole world, for that
world which moves without cessation, and goes on developing,
and in the name of this usefulness, which is differently
understood by each of them, he prescribes to himself and to
others for a time to depart from the unquestionable law,
which is given to him and to all men, and not to act toward
all men as he wants others to act toward him, not to bring
love into the world, but to practise violence, to deprive of
freedom, to punish, to kill, to introduce malice into Che
world, when it is found that this is necessary. And he
enjoins us to do so knowing that the most terrible
cruelties, tortures, murders of men, from the Inquisitions
and punishments and terrors of all the revolutions to the
present bestialities of the anarchists and the massacres of
them, have all proceeded from this, that men suppose that
they know what people and the world need; knowing that at
any given moment there are always two opposite parties, each
of which asserts that it is necessary to use violence
against the opposite party,---the men of state against the
anarchists, the anarchists against the men of state; the
English against the Americans, the Americans against the
English; the English against the Germans; and so forth, in
all possible combinations and permutations.

Not only does a man of the Christian concept of life see
clearly by reflection that there is no ground whatever for
his departure from the law of his life, as clearly indicated
to him by God, in order to follow the accidental, frail,
frequently contradictory demands of men; but if he has been
living the Christian life for some time, and has developed
in himself the Christian moral sensitiveness, he can
positively not act as people demand that he shall, not only
as the result of reflection, but also of feeling.

As it is for many men of our world impossible to subject a
child to torture and to kill it, though such a torture may
save a hundred other people, so a whole series of acts
becomes impossible for a man who has developed the Christian
sensitiveness of his heart in himself. A Chris- tian, for
example, who is compelled to take part in court proceedings,
where a man may be sentenced to capital punishment, to take
part in matters of forcible seizure of other people's
property, in discussions about the declaration of war, or in
preparations for the same, to say nothing of war itself,
finds himself in the same position in which a good man would
be, if he were compelled to torture or kill a child. It is
not that he decides by reflection what he ought not to do,
but that he cannot do what is demanded of him, because for a
man there exists the moral impossibility, just as there is a
physical impossibility, of committing certain acts. Just as
it is impossible for a man to lift up a mountain, as it is
impossible for a good man to kill a child, so it is
impossible for a man who lives a Christian life to take part
in violence. Of what significance for such a man can be the
reflections that for some imaginary good he must do what has
become morally impossible for him?

How, then, is a man to act when he sees the obvious harm of
following the law of love and the law of non-resistance,
which results from it? How is a man to act---this example is
always adduced---when a robber in his sight kills or injures
a child, and when the child cannot be saved otherwise than
by killing the robber?

It is generally assumed that, when they adduce such an
example, there can be no other answer to the question than
that the robber ought to be killed, in order that the child
be saved. But this answer is given so emphatically and so
quickly only because we are not only in the habit of acting
in this manner in the case of the defence of a child, but
also in the case of the expansion of the borders of a
neighbouring state to the detriment of our own, or in the
case of the transportation of lace across the border, or
even in the case of the defence of the fruits of our garden
against depredations by passers-by.

It is assumed that it is necessary to kill the robber in
order to save the child, but we need only stop and think on
what ground a man should act thus, be he a Christian or a
non-Christian, to convince ourselves that such an act can
have no rational foundations, and is considered necessary
only because two thousand years ago such a mode of action
was considered just and people were in the habit of acting
thus. Why should a non-Christian, who does not recognize God
and the meaning of life in the fulfilment of His will, kill
the robber, in defending the child? To say nothing of this,
that in killing the robber he is certainly killing, but does
not know for certain until the very last moment whether the
robber will kill the child or not, to say nothing of this
irregularity: who has decided that the life of the child is
more necessary and better than the life of the robber?

If a non-Christian does not recognize God, and does not
consider the meaning of life to consist in the fulfilment of
God's will, it is only calculation, that is, the
consideration as to what is more profitable for him and for
all men, the continuation of the robber's life or that of
the child, which guides the choice of his acts. But to
decide this, he must know what will become of the child
which he saves, and what would become of the robber if he
did not kill him. But that he cannot know. And so, if he is
a non-Christian, he has no rational foundation for saving
the child through the death of the robber.

But if a man is a Christian, and so recognizes God and sees
the meaning of life in the fulfilment of His will, no matter
what terrible robber may attack any innocent and beautiful
child, he has still less cause to depart from the law given
him by God and to do to the robber what the robber wants to
do to the child; he may implore the robber, may place his
body between the robber and his victim, but there is one
thing he cannot do,---he cannot consciously depart from the
law of God, the fulfilment of which forms the meaning of his
life. It is very likely that, as the result of his bad
bringing up and of his animality, a man, being a pagan or a
Christian, will kill the robber, not only in the defence of
the child, but also in his own defence or in the defence of
his purse, but that will by no means signify that it is
right to do so, that it is right to accustom ourselves and
others to think that that ought to be done.

This will only mean that, in spite of the external education
and Christianity, the habits of the stone age are still
strong in man, that he is capable of committing acts which
have long ago been disavowed by his consciousness. A robber
in my sight is about to kill a child and I can save it by
killing the robber; consequently it is necessary under
certain conditions to resist evil with violence.

A man is in danger of his life and can be saved only through
my lie; consequently it is necessary in certain cases to
lie. A man is starving, and I cannot save him otherwise than
by stealing; consequently it is necessary in certain cases
to steal.

I lately read a story by Coppée, in which an orderly kills
his officer, who has his life insured, and thus saves his
honour and the life of his family. Consequently in certain
cases it is right to kill.

Such imaginary cases and the conclusions drawn from them
prove only this, that there are men who know that it is not
right to steal, to lie, to kill, but who are so loath to
stop doing this that they use all the efforts of their mind
in order to justify their acts. There does not exist a moral
rule for which it would be impossible to invent a situation
when it would be hard to decide which is more moral, the
departure from the rule or its fulfilment. The same is true
of the question of non-resistance to evil: men know that it
is bad, but they are so anxious to live by violence, that
they use all the efforts of their mind, not for the
elucidation of all the evil which is produced by man's
recognition of the right to do violence to others, but for
the defence of this right. But such invented cases in no way
prove that the rules about not lying, stealing, killing are
incorrect.

"*Fais ce que doit, advienne que pourra*,---do what is
right, and let come what may,"---is an expression of
profound wisdom. Each of us knows unquestionably what he
ought to do, but none of us knows or can know what will
happen. Thus we are brought to the same, not only by this,
that we must do what is right, but also by this, that we
know what is right, and do not know at all what will come
and result from our acts.

The Christian teaching is a teaching as to what a man must
do for the fulfilment of the will of Him who sent him into
the world. But the reflections as to what consequences we
assume to result from such or such acts of men not only have
nothing in common with Christianity, but are that very
delusion which destroys Christianity.

No one has yet seen the imaginary robber with the imaginary
child, and all the horrors, which fill history and
contemporary events, have been produced only because men
imagine that they can know the consequences of the possible
acts.

How is this? Men used to live a beastly life, violating and
killing all those whom it was advantageous for them to
violate and kill, and even eating one another, thinking that
that was right. Then there came a time, when, thousands of
years ago, even in the time of Moses, there appeared the
consciousness in men that it was bad to violate and kill one
another. But there were some men for whom violence was
advantageous, and they did not recognize the fact, and
assured themselves and others that it was not always bad to
violate and kill men, but that there were cases when this
was necessary, useful, and even good. And acts of violence
and murder, though not as frequent and cruel, were
continued, but with this difference, that those who
committed them justified them on the ground of usefulness to
men. It was this false justification of violence that Christ
arraigned. He showed that, since every act of violence could
be justified, as actually happens, when two enemies do
violence to one another and both consider their violence
justifiable, and there is no chance of verifying the justice
of the determination of either, it is necessary not to
believe in any justifications of violence, and under no
condition, as at first was thought right by humanity, is it
necessary to make use of them.

It would seem that men who profess Christianity would have
carefully to unveil this deception, because in the unveiling
of this deception does one of the chief manifestations of
Christianity consist. But the very opposite has happened:
men to whom violence was advantageous, and who did not want
to give up these advantages, took upon themselves the
exclusive propaganda of Christianity, and, preaching it,
asserted that, since there are cases in which the
non-application of violence produces more evil than its
application (the imaginary robber who kills the child), we
must not fully accept Christ's teaching about non-resist-
ance to evil, and that we may depart from this teaching in
the defence of our lives and of those of other men, in the
defence of our country, the protection of society from
madmen and malefactors, and in many other cases. But the
decision of the question as to when Christ's teaching ought
to be set aside was left to those very men who made use of
violence. Thus Christ's teaching about non-resistance to
evil turned out to be absolutely set aside, and, what is
worse than all that, those very men whom Christ arraigned
began to consider themselves the exclusive preachers and
expounders of His teaching. But the light shineth in the
dark, and the false preachers of Christianity are again
arraigned by His teaching.

We can think of the structure of the world as we please, we
may do what is advantageous and agreeable for us to do, and
use violence against people under the pretext of doing good
to men, but it is absolutely imposible to assert that, in
doing so, we are professing Christ's teaching, because
Christ arraigned that very deception. The truth will sooner
or later be made manifest, and will arraign the deceivers,
even as it does now.

Let only the question of the human life be put correctly, as
it was put by Christ, and not as it was corrupted by the
churches, and all the deceptions which by the churches have
been heaped on Christ's teaching will fall of their own
accord.

The question is not whether it will be good or bad for human
society to follow the law of love and the resulting law of
non-resistance, but whether you---a being that lives to-day
and is dying by degrees to-morrow and every moment---will
now, this very minute, fully do the will of Him who sent you
and clearly expressed it in tradition and in your reason and
heart, or whether you want to act contrary to this will. As
soon as the question is put in this form, there will be but
one answer: I want at once, this very minute, without any
delay, without waiting for any one, and without considering
the seeming consequences, with all my strength to fulfil
what alone I am indubitably commanded to do by Him who sent
me into the world, and in no case, under no condition, will
I, can I, do what is contrary to it, because in this lies
the only possibility of my rational, unwretched life.

*January 12, 1896.*
