# Introduction to First Edition

Here is a new kind of book. The title might give the
impression that this is another book by a dreamer of dreams,
that once more the idealist has projected his iridescent
rainbow, which will always be put in the sky and. never
touch the earth at any point.

But the reader will soon discover that this book is not just
another dream, or one more rainbow vision. There is as much
realism in this book as there is idealism. It is a fine
blend of *what is* and *what ought to be*. In any case, for
this writer, *what ought to be* springs out of, and has its
ground and basis in, *what is*. We are not invited to watch
mental "projections" shot up like rockets. We are rather
called upon to follow a careful dialectic process which
shows an effective method of life demonstrating itself,
proving its genuine worth and verifying itself in practice.

Nobody can read Chapter II of this book---"Moral
jiujitsu"---or Chapter III---"What Happens"---without being
convinced that he. is not being rushed into a vague
subjective idealism. These two chapters, to single out only
two, gave me a compelling sense, as I read them in
manuscript, that there was a clear thinking mind behind the
pen that wrote them and that the book must go forth into
print to do its work of leadership in the world.

I rejoice to see it on its way, and I predict for it a
farreaching appreciative welcome.

Let me give one or two "exhibits" of the practical wisdom of
the book: "As a method of solving a conflict, non-violent
resistance is sounder than reciprocal violence because it is
more efficient. The first reason for this is partly
physiological. Anger, hatred and fear make an enormous drain
upon our energy."

"The peaceful resister has to expend much energy, but he
applies it more intelligently than does the violent man. He
selects the really important forces in the environment and
seeks to alter them. The angry and violent man puts too much
emphasis on immediate objects and too little on the ultimate
impelling forces behind them. If he considers impelling
forces, he does not analyze them sufficiently or go far
enough back. He has to waste much energy because, as it
were, he uses too short leverages in attempting to move or
divert opposing objects or forces. The non-violent resister,
by using longer psychological leverages, may have to move
more slowly sometimes, but the work is more efficiently done
and tends to be more permanent."

"Peace imposed by violence is not psychological peace but a
suppressed conflict. It is unstable for it contains the
seeds of its own destruction. The outer condition is not a
true reflection of the inner condition. But in peace secured
by true non-violent resistance there is no longer any inner
conflict but a new channel found in which both the formerly
conflicting energies are at work in the same direction and
in harmony. Here the outer condition reflects the inner
condition. This is perhaps one reason why Gandhi calls this
mode of solving conflicts"Satyagraha"---holding to truth.
Such a peace is enduring."

These are only a few vivid snap-shots out of the compact
wisdom of the book. The author has drawn upon almost every
department of life to illustrate his thesis. In one chapter
he is a historian, in another he is a psychologist, in
another he takes us into the technique of the lawcourt, in
another he shows the statesman confronted with the problems
of international life. He is as much at home in one field as
in another.

We expected him to draw upon the New Testament, especially
upon the Sermon on the Mount, for texts on non-violence. And
so he does. But the reader will soon discover that this is
only one of the author's many effective religious documents.
He draws upon the literary sources of all the great
religions of the world. This book has something to say to
Hindus and Muslims and Buddhists and Jews as well as to
Christians. He reinforces his argument from Tolstoy and
St.Â Francis, from George Fox and Gandhi, but we are never
left with sentiment and enthusiasms. The argument is
buttressed with the insight and the wisdom of the men of the
world's affairs and with the judgment of leading economists
and sociologists as well as with the insights and
inspiration of prophets and seers.

There is a remarkable story about Moses in ancient Hebrew
legends. It tells how when Moses was going up the mountain
to his death on Pisgah he asked Jehovah why it was not
possible for him to be allowed to enter the Promised Land
which he could see stretching out before his dying eyes.
"You doubted me," Jehovah said to him, "But I forgave you
that doubt." "You doubted your own self and failed to
believe in your own powers as a leader, and I forgave that
also. But you lost faith in this people and doubted the
divine possibilities of human nature. *That* I cannot
forgive. That loss of faith makes it impossible for you to
enter the Land of Promise."

It is only a legend, but it suggests a profound truth. It is
only those who believe in man and have faith and hope in the
new and better world which man in co-operation with God can
build here on earth that help to lead us toward the lands of
promise. The author of this book has this deep-seated faith
and he has effectively interpreted it.

Haverford, Penna.

Rufus M. Jones

Penna.

# Preface to New Edition

There is a political maxim, almost an axiom, that you cannot
permanently govern large numbers of people merely by
violence or by deceit or both. Despite the events of the
last decade, this maxim stands. Part of the converse of this
maxim is a proposition whose truth is much less generally
recognized, namely that in nonviolence and truth there is
power.

The struggle in India during 1930-33 and the subsequent and
continuing impasse of the British Government in India prove
that the method of non-violent resistance which Gandhi
advocates and uses is potent. If, then, this method of
dealing with conflicts has elements of practical validity,
the vastly increasing perils of war and class conflict make
it important for us to learn whatever may help to evolve
peace.

Is non-violent resistance intellectually and morally
respectable or not? If anywhere it is at all practical, to
what extent, and why? Is it applicable in the West, or not?
The subject of pacificism, in both individual and collective
use, should be removed from the profitless atmosphere of
emotional adjectives and of vague mysticism, futile protests
and sentimentalism combined with confused thinking. Both the
advocates and opponents of non-violent resistance need to
understand it much more clearly and fully.

It is difficult for one trained in modern Western modes of
thought and action to understand this idea or to believe
that its practice can be cogent. Even Gandhi's explanations
of it fail to carry weight with most of us. His explanations
come out of a background of thought, feeling, and attitude
to life very different from ours. The assumptions of Indians
are different, and so are their social experience, the
elements of thought which are implicit but never definitely
stated, their historical allusions, their analogies and
figures of speech. Therefore I have felt it desirable to
restate and explain this method in modern Western concepts
and terminology. But the book is not a history of the Indian
struggle for independence, or even of Gandhi's part in it.

I have tried to test the idea of non-violence with the
recent findings of psychology, military and political
strategy, political theory, economics, physiology, biology,
ethics, penology, and education. Yet I have tried to be
simple, to avoid technical jargon, and to keep the treatment
fresh. I have tried to meet the critics of the idea fairly
on their own ground.

I have, however, not limited the explanation merely to
Gandhi's own concepts or to India, but have tried to explain
and evaluate the principle in its application in any
country, at any time, under any circumstances, and for any
cause. I have attempted to show why persuasion of this sort
is more powerful and. more permanently advantageous than
physical coercion.

If we want a better world, we must be prepared to do some
careful thinking. It is time we stopped being sketchy on a
matter which touches us all so closely. For in reality this
matter of handling conflict constructively is of immediate
concern to everyone who has ever been angry or afraid,
resentful, revengeful, or bitter; who has ever taken part in
a fight, mob-violence, or war; or who has been the object of
anger, hatred, exploitation, or oppression. It touches all
who are troubled lest the vast economic, political, and
social questions which are pressing upon all nations will
issue in still more appalling violence and increased
insecurity for everyone. It is also important to those who
hope that somehow the ideals and conduct of mankind can be
harmonized, and the ideals made practical.

My qualifications for writing this book are experiences of
conflict involved in my three years' practice of law and
seven years in industrial relations work---investigation,
conciliation, arbitration, publicity and statistical work
for trade unions, followed by a stay in India of nearly four
years beginning early in 1925, of which about seven months
altogether were spent at Gandhi's own *ashrama* at
Sabarmati, another six-weeks' visit to India in March and
April, 1930, many discussions with Gandhi and a careful
study of all that he has written, so far as I could find it;
also a study of much of the other literature of the entire
subject of conflict and peace.

To all the profound, clear, and sensitive minds with which I
have come in contact, in India and in other countries, in
the past and the present, I owe a great obligation. To
Gandhi especially I am grateful. For criticism and help I
desire to thank especially my wife, W. Norman Brown,
Caroline F. Tupper, Blanche Watson, John Nevin Sayre, Rufus
M. Jones, my sister, Marjorie T. Gregg, and the late C. F.
Andrews. I want also to thank all the authors and publishers
who have kindly permitted me to quote from their books and
articles.

The first edition of this book was published in 1935. It is
now out of print. Subsequent events have raised many
questions not considered in the first edition. The Second
World War has created such confused thoughts and feelings,
and raised problems which are so universal, so important, so
difficult, and so insistent that it has seemed desirable to
issue a new edition which will discuss the chief of these
new problems and yet be less expensive and thus find a wider
circle of readers.

To do this I have cut from the first edition eight chapters
with their notes and in place of them inserted three new
chapters. The chapters which were eliminated had these
titles: "The Class Struggle and Non-violent Resistance",
"Further Political Aspects", "Biological Considerations",
"Doubts and Querries", "Preparations for Nonviolence",
"Further Understanding", "Self-Discipline", "Group Training
and Discipline". The three new chapters discuss
"Persuasion", "The Need for Discipline" and "Discipline". I
was especially regretful at having to drop off the chapter
on the class struggle. Though limitations of expense
prevented bringing some of the historical matter up to date
and broadening its scope, the conclusions originally derived
have not been invalidated.

Putney, Vermont, August 1944.

Richard B. Gregg

# I. Modern Examples of Non-Violent Resistance

There have been many instances of successful use of
non-violent resistance in different countries and at
different times. As the taste of historians inclines more
toward politics and wars, these other events have received
but slight attention at their hands, and the records of many
of them have been lost. In some instances the nonviolent
resistance was by individuals, in other instances it took a
mass or corporate form. The latter form is rarer and perhaps
more significant. For this reason and because this book is
not primarily a history, I will only attempt to tell of a
few outstanding successful modern examples of the latter
sort, giving references, however, to books in which cases of
both kinds are described.

The first one to be considered occurred in Hungary during
the mid-nineteenth century.[^1] The Emperor Franz Josef was
trying to subordinate Hungary to the Austrian power,
contrary to the terms of the old treaty of union of those
two countries. The Hungarian moderates felt helpless, as
they were too weak to fight. But Francis Deak, a Catholic
landowner of Hungary, protested to them---"Your laws are
violated, yet your mouths remain closed! Woe to the nation
which raises no protest when its rights are outraged! It
contributes to its own slavery by its silence. The nation
which submits to injustice and oppression without protest is
doomed."

Deak proceeded to organize a scheme for independent
Hungarian education, agriculture and industry, a refusal to
recognize the Austrian Government in any way, and a boycott
against Austrian goods. He admonished the people not to be
betrayed into acts of violence, nor to abandon the ground of
legality. "This is the safe ground," he said, "on which,
unarmed ourselves, we can hold our own against armed force.
If suffering must be necessary, suffer with dignity." This
advice was obeyed throughout Hungary.

When the Austrian tax collector came the people did not beat
him or even hoot him---they merely declined to pay. The
Austrian police then seized their goods, but no Hungarian
auctioneer would sell them. When an Austrian auctioneer was
brought, he found that he would have to bring bidders from
Austria to buy the goods. The Government soon discovered
that it was costing more to distrain the property than the
tax was worth.

The Austrians attempted to billet their soldiers upon the
Hungarians. The Hungarians did not actively resist the
order, but the Austrian soldiers, after trying to live in
houses where everyone despised them, protested strongly
against it. The Austrian Government declared the boycott of
Austrian goods illegal, but the Hungarians defied the
decree. The jails were filled to overflowing. No
representatives from Hungary would sit in the Imperial
Parliament.

The Austrians then tried conciliation. The prisoners were
released and partial self-government given. But Hungary
insisted upon its full claims. In reply, Emperor Franz Josef
decreed compulsory military service. The Hungarians answered
that they would refuse to obey it. Finally, on February 18,
1867, the Emperor capitulated and gave Hungary her
constitution.

This campaign seems to have been defective because of some
violence of inner attitude on the part of the Hungarians.
But even so, it provided a remarkable example of the power
of non-violent resistance, even though the principle was
imperfectly realized and applied.

The next example occurred in South Africa. It lasted eight
years, beginning in 1906. For many years previously Indians
had been coming to Natal as manual workers in the mines and
elsewhere, originally at the invitation of the Europeans who
wished to develop the country. Many thousands of the Indians
came as indentured labourers, whose term of service was five
years. They were industrious, entered into farming and
trade, and thereby began to compete with the Europeans. By
1906 some 12,500 of them had crossed the border and settled
in the Transvaal. They were subject to many unfair laws. In
1906, the Government of the Transvaal introduced a bill in
the legislature which would require every Indian to be
registered by finger print, like criminals, and to produce
his certificate of registration upon demand of any police
officer at any time. Failure to register meant deportation,
and refusal to produce the certificate would be punished by
fine.

The Indians had always been subject to severe restrictions,
but this proposal meant their complete subjection and
probably their destruction as a community. Under the
leadership of an Indian lawyer, M. K. Gandhi, they held
meetings of protest and asked for hearings on the bill. But
the Government ruthlessly passed it. Thereupon the leading
Indians, at a huge mass meeting, took an oath that they
would all refuse to register and would go to jail rather
than obey the law which by its terms they regarded as an
attack upon the very foundations of their religion, their
national honour, their racial self-respect, and their
manhood.

They stuck to their resolve and Gandhi and many others went
to jail. The Prime Minister, General Smuts, then undertook
to have the law repealed if the Indians would register
voluntarily. The Indians agreed and did their part, but
General Smuts did not carry out his side of the agreement.
Not only that, but the Government introduced a further bill
which applied the old registration law to all Asiatics who
had not voluntarily registered. The Indians then resolved to
renew the struggle.

Not long after that, in 1913, a European judge in the
Transvaal Supreme Court made a court decision which
invalidated all Hindu and Muslim marriages, and thus
rendered all the Indian children illegitimate and incapable
of inheriting property. This roused all the Indian women. A
group of them, at Gandhi's suggestion, crossed from the
Transvaal to Natal, an act forbidden to them by law, and
picketed the Natal mines which were worked by Indian
labourers. The women were imprisoned. But the men, numbering
about five thousand, all came out on strike as a protest
against this court decision about marriages and against a
very heavy and oppressive head-tax which practically kept
them in slavery. Under Gandhi's leadership they started a
march on foot across the border into the Transvaal, by way
of a non-violent protest. It was against the law for Indians
to cross the boundary line in either direction without
permission.

Gandhi notified the Government of this proposal and asked
for a revocation of the law, several days before the march,
and again just before it started, but to no effect.

They marched, some four thousand strong, about twenty-five
miles a day, living on the charity of Indian merchants.
During the march Gandhi was arrested three times, released
on bail twice, and finally put in jail. The border was
crossed and the army continued, leaderless, but still
non-violent. Finally they were all arrested and taken back
by train to Natal. They had accomplished their
object,---namely to be put in jail and to make an effective
protest.

They were impounded at the mines and beaten and ill-treated.
Still they remained firm and non-violent. This brutal affair
aroused a tremendous storm of public opinion both in South
Africa and India. Lord Hardinge, the Viceroy of India, in a
public speech at Madras, praised and defended the conduct of
the non-violent resisters and protested against the acts of
the Union of South Africa. Two Englishmen, Messrs. C. F.
Andrews and W. W. Pearson, went from India at the request of
the Indian public. Later on, the Viceroy sent Sir Benjamin
Robertson to represent the Government of India. But the
negotiations with the protesting Indians remained entirely
in Gandhi's hands.

General Smuts, seeing that he must retreat, appointed a
committee of investigation to save the face of the
Government, and at the same time released Gandhi and two
other leaders of the Indians. The Indians requested Indian
representation on the committee of inquiry as surety of good
faith. General Smuts refused, so Gandhi prepared to renew
the struggle.

Just then a strike broke out among the European railwaymen
in South Africa. Gandhi saw that the Government was in a
very difficult situation, but instead of taking advantage of
the incident, he chivalrously suspended the Indian struggle
until the railway strike was over, an act which won much
admiration for the Indians.

After the railway strike was over, General Smuts found it
necessary to yield, and the Indians won all the major parts
of their demands, namely the abolition of the registration,
the abolition of the three-pound head-tax, the validation of
their marriages, the right of entry of educated Indians, and
an assurance of just administration of existing laws. Thus
the whole struggle was won by non-violent resistance.[^2]

Another application of this principle was in behalf of the
indigo peasant farmers of Champaran, a district of Bihar, in
northern India, in 1917. The peasants there were compelled
by law to plant three-twentieths of all their land in indigo
and also were subject to other oppressive exactions by the
planters. Gandhi, who had returned to live in India in 1914,
was invited to investigate the conditions of the workers on
the indigo plantations and the treatment given them by their
employers. He began his inquiry without publicity but the
planters much resented his activities there and persuaded
the District Magistrate that the presence of Gandhi was
dangerous to the peace of the district. The Magistrate
served an order upon Gandhi to leave the district by the
next available train. Gandhi replied that he had come there
from a sense of duty, that nothing was being done except
carefully and quietly to ascertain facts, and that he would
stay and, if necessary, submit to the penalty for
disobedience.

He and his companions then proceeded quietly to take down in
writing the statements of the peasants who came flocking to
tell of their wrongs. The witnesses were questioned to
elicit the exact truth. The Government sent police officers
who were present at these proceedings and took notes of what
happened. Gandhi and his assistants arranged that if he
should be jailed or deported, two of them would go on with
the taking of peasants' testimony; and if those two were
arrested, then two more should take up the work, and so on.

Gandhi was summoned to court and tried. He simply pleaded
guilty, and stated that he was faced with a conflict of
duty---whether to obey the law or his conscience and the
humane purposes for which he had come; and that under the
circumstances he could only throw the responsibility of
removing him upon the administration. The Magistrate
postponed judgment, and before it was rendered the
Lieutenant-Governor gave orders that Gandhi should be
permitted to proceed with the investigation. Then the
Governor of the province interested himself in the case and,
after conferring with Gandhi, appointed a Government
commission of inquiry with Gandhi as a member. The
commission reported unanimously that the law was unfair and
the exactions of the big planters unjust. The law was
repealed and justice given to the peasants. All this was
wholly non-violent.3 In purpose, the struggle was purely for
economic justice, with no political implications.

Another non-violent struggle, this time for social rights,
took place in a village called Vykom, in the State of
Travancore in southern India. It was also directed by
Gandhi, through some of his followers. A highway ran through
the low-lying country around Vykom and through the village
and close by the Brahman quarter and a temple. For centuries
the Brahmans had refused to permit any low-caste
"untouchable" people to use this road. The followers of
Gandhi decided that this custom must be ended, and the road
thrown open to all human beings alike. Gandhi was ill, many
hundred miles away, but the young leaders came north and
consulted with him on the plan of campaign, and as it
proceeded he instructed them by letters and telegrams from
his sick bed. Later he visited Vykom personally.

The leaders started the struggle by taking several of the
"untouchable" friends with them along this road and into the
Brahman quarter. They were immediately beaten by the
Brahmans, and one was seriously hurt. But the young
reformers offered no violence in return. Then the police
arrested several of these young men for encouraging
trespass. They were condemned to prison for different
periods of time, up to one year. At once, volunteers came
pouring in from all parts of the country to take the place
of those who were arrested. The State then forbade any
further arrests but ordered the police to prevent any more
of the reformers from entering the road. The police made a
cordon across the road. Thereupon, by instructions from
Gandhi, the reformers stood opposite the police barrier in
aq attitude of prayer. They organized themselves into
shifts, taking turns in standing there for six hours at a
time. They built a hut near by, undertook their duties on a
religious basis and did hand spinning while not on active
duty. At no time did they offer any violence.

This programme continued for months. Gandhi told them it
must continue indefinitely until the hearts of the Brahmans
should be melted. Finally the rainy season came and the
road, being on low ground, was flooded. Still the volunteers
continued to stand, at times up to their shoulders in water,
while the police kept the cordon in small boats. The shifts
had to be shortened to three hours.

All this time there was a furore of discussion of the matter
all over India. The endurance and the consistent
non-violence of the reformers was finally too much for the
obstinacy of the Brahmans. In the autumn of 1925 after a
year and four months they broke down saying, "We cannot any
longer resist the prayers that have been made to us, and we
are ready to receive the untouchables." The Brahmans opened
the road to all comers and the low caste people were allowed
to walk at any time past the temple and past the Brahman
quarters.

This change of policy had reverberations all through India
and aided in removing similar restrictions against
"untouchables" in other parts of India, and in strengthening
the cause of caste reform.[^3]

Still another successful non-violent struggle for economic
justice took place in 1921 up in the Himalayas, north of
Simla, in a little district called Kotgarh, with a
population of only a few thousand. This district is on the
highway between India and Tibet. As the scenery is of
surpassing beauty and grandeur and some good hunting ground
is not far beyond, the road was frequented by hunters and
Government officials on vacations.

For years there had been a custom known as Begar, whereby
any Government official or European could demand from any
village headman along the road the services of as many men
as the traveller desired, at any time, for as long a period
as he wanted, for carrying luggage or messages at an utterly
inadequate wage. Also the people could be required to drive
their cows to the dak bungalow (a sort of inn) and supply as
much milk as the traveller desired, also at ridiculously low
prices. Thus farmers, many more than were needed, could be
haled away from ploughing, or sowing or harvesting their
crops or any other pressing business, to suit the whims of
any European who was on the road.

One of the local Indian leaders protested but he was
immediately jailed and the villagers were threatened with
talk of machine guns and the like. A Mr.Â S. E. Stokes, who
was living on his estate in the district and operating an
apple orchard, decided to organize the resistance against
this injustice. He was in sympathy with Gandhi's ideas and
worked out the plan on non-violent lines. But Gandhi himself
had no part in the struggle.

The district elected a small committee or "panchayat" to
direct the movement, of which Stokes was a leading member.
In every village in the district all the people took an oath
by their village gods to obey the orders of the committee
and not to negotiate with the Government in this matter
except through the committee.

The committee wrote out a long and carefully worded
statement of the situation and its injustices and sent it to
the District Commissioner. They requested hearings, but no
notice was taken of it by the Commissioner. Letters were
written to all the responsible officials. Copies of all
letters were retained by the committee. Still the Begar
exactions continued. The committee then notified the
Commissioner that if the exactions were not ended on a
stated date the entire district would refuse all requests
for service.

This brought action. The Commissioner came up from Simla and
called a large meeting. He threatened and used every
stratagem he could to cause division between the different
villages and castes, so as to break down the authority of
the committee. But every man who was asked a question
declined to answer, except through the committee. Moreover
they all refused to give food or any service to any
Government official or European travelling on that section
of the road.

In a few weeks the District Commissioner had acceded to
every single demand of the villagers' committee, and had to
post all along the road printed rules which strictly limited
the amount of service that could be asked and specified the
wages. The struggle lasted several months, without the least
violence by the farmers, and the outcome was a complete
success in the district.[^4]

Another effective campaign of non-violent resistance took
place in 1928 in Bardoli Taluka, a small district near Surat
in Bombay Presidency, India. It was undertaken by the
peasant inhabitants numbering about 88,000. in order to
correct an economic injustice.

Contrary to the advice of the Joint Parliamentary Committee
appointed to consider the Government of India Bill, 1919,
and contrary to a resolution of the Legislative Council of
the Bombay Presidency in 1924, the Bombay Provincial
Government in 1927 enhanced the rate of rural taxation very
severely, nominally 22 per cent' but in actual application
in some instances over 60 per cent. The peasantry claimed
that the investigation upon which the increase had been
based was wholly inadequate, that the tax official's report
was inaccurate and carelessly compiled, and that the
increase was unwarranted and unjust. They asked the Governor
to appoint an independent and impartial committee of inquiry
to hold a thorough public investigation of all the evidence.
The Government paid no attention to the request. Then, after
giving due notice of their intentions, the peasants of the
entire district refused to pay the tax. At the initiative
and request of the local people the movement was led by
Mr.Â Vallabhbhai Patel, with the inspiration and advice of
Gandhi. Mr.Â Patel held several large conferences with
representatives from more than half the villages and of
every class and religious community. He questioned these
representatives very closely to estimate their determination
and strength, and the cohesion and staying power of each and
every village of the entire district. He explained in full
detail the history of the case, their legal rights and the
justice of their demands. He described clearly and fully to
the villagers the possibilities and terrors of Government
power. He told them that the struggle might be prolonged
indefinitely. He gave them several days to think it all
over, to count the cost, and to discuss it amongst
themselves. They returned to a still larger meeting and
after further discussion resolved to enter upon the
struggle.

For several years before there had been four or five social
service centres in different parts of the district, headed
by well-trained and disciplined workers. These were the
beginning of the organization. Sixteen "camps" were located
at convenient places through the district, and about 250
volunteer leaders were placed in these camps. In addition,
there were volunteers in each village. These volunteers were
to collect the news and information about the struggle in
each village and forward it promptly every day to the
headquarters of the movement. The volunteers also kept
careful watch of the movements of all Government officials
and warned the people of their coming and intentions. A news
bulletin was printed every day and distributed to every
village. Eventually, 10,000 copies a day were distributed in
the district and 4,000 to subscribers outside. Mr.Â Patel's
speeches were also distributed in pamphlet form. For the
first month the volunteers spent much time getting
signatures to a printed pledge by which the signers promised
to stick together under their leaders, to adhere to truth
and to remain nonviolent no matter what happened. Almost
everyone signed the pledge. The women were organized as well
as the men and took just as active a part as the men.

Meanwhile, Mr.Â Patel had extensive correspondence with the
Government, trying in every way to get the officials to see
the justice and lawfulness of the peasants' claim and
request, and to clarify the people's position. But the
officials were adamant and the struggle began.

The Government did its best to compel the peasants to pay
the tax. It tried flattery and bribery with some; fines,
floggings and imprisonment of others. It tried to divide the
communities against each other. The Government officers
seized and sold goods of the peasantry. It caused much of
the peasants' land to be forfeited, and sold over 1,400
acres of such land at auction. It brought in number of
Pathans, Muslims of the North-West Frontier Province, who
insulted and tried to terrorize the villagers who were
mostly Hindus. There were but few waverers or weaklings. The
oppression solidified the feeling of the people. The caste
organizations were strengthened. A strong social boycott was
maintained against all Government representatives and anyone
who purchased distrained goods or forfeited lands. But
Mr.Â Patel insisted that this boycott must not interfere with
the supply of physical necessities to such people.

The publicity all over the country was enormous, and the
sympathy of Indians of all kinds was almost universally with
the peasants. The matter was discussed very fully in the
Provincial legislature, and several members of the
legislature resigned in protest against the Government's
stand. The matter was discussed even in Parliament in
London.

Through it all, the peasants stood firm, yet non-violent.
After five and a half months, the Government had to yield to
practically every one of the demands. The Governor appointed
a committee of inquiry, agreed to restore all the land which
had been sold or forfeited, and reinstated the village
officials who had resigned. When the committee of inquiry
made its report, it "substantially justified" the original
complaints of the peasants and recommended a tax increase
less than that which had been assessed by the Government. I
understand that the decision was put into effect.[^5]

In India there have been other instances of the successful
use of organized mass non-violent resistance, as in the
Ahmedabad mill strike in 1917 and the struggles against the
Government at Kheda in 1916-17, at Borsad in 1923, and at
Nagpur in 1927. All of these were conducted or supervised by
Gandhi. The Kheda and Borsad struggles were in regard to
taxation, and the Nagpur struggle involved the right to
parade with an Indian Nationalist flag.

The Akali Sikhs in the Punjab waged a non-violent struggle
for a period of years beginning in 1922 in behalf of their
rights to control certain temple properties, in which they
were partly successful.[^6] Gandhi had no hand in this,
except to give encouragement.

Besides these there was the all-India non-co-operation
struggle of 1921-22 which was unsuccessful in its immediate
objective and yet immensely successful in awakening that
country with its population of 350,000,000 people to desire
freedom and to work concretely for its attainment. It
profoundly altered the entire political situation in India,
and thereby in the British Empire.[^7] The story of that
struggle and the still more momentous one in which India is
now (1930-34) engaged would occupy more space than I can now
command, even if we had the complete information and the
historical perspective to describe it adequately.[^8]
Nevertheless, in order to provide a further basis for
understanding, I will quote from press dispatches about two
incidents in the struggle of 1930.

The New York "Telegram" carried a long dispatch from
Mr.Â Webb Miller, special correspondent for the United Press.
I quote only a part.

> Dharasana Camp, Surat District, Bombay Presidency, May 22
> (by mail)---Amazing scenes were witnessed yesterday when
> more than 2,500 Gandhi 'volunteers' advanced against the
> salt pans here in defiance of police regulations.
>
> The official government version of the raid, issued today,
> stated that 'from Congress sources it is estimated 170
> sustained injuries, but only three or four were seriously
> hurt.'
>
> About noon yesterday I visited the temporary hospital in
> the Congress camp and counted more than 200 injured lying
> in rows on the ground. I verified by personal observation
> that they were suffering injuries. Today even the British
> owned newspapers give the total number at 320...
>
> The scene at Dharasana during the raid was astonishing and
> baffling to the Western mind accustomed to see violence
> met by violence, to expect a blow to be returned and a
> fight result. During the morning I saw and heard hundreds
> of blows inflicted by the police, but saw not a single
> blow returned by the volunteers. So far as I could observe
> the volunteers implicitly obeyed Gandhi's creed of
> non-violence. In no case did I see a volunteer even raise
> an arm to deflect the blows from lathis. There were no
> outcries from the beaten Swarajists, only groans after
> they had submitted to their beating.
>
> Obviously it was the purpose of the volunteers to force
> the police to beat them. The police were placed in a
> difficult position by the refusal to disperse and the
> action of volunteers in continually pressing closer to the
> salt pans.
>
> Many times I saw the police vainly threaten the advancing
> volunteers with upraised lathis. Upon their determined
> refusal to recede the lathis would fall upon the
> unresisting body, the volunteer would fall back bleeding
> or bruised and be carried away on a stretcher. Waiting
> volunteers, on the outskirts of the pans, often rushed and
> congratulated the beaten volunteer as he was carried off
> the field. It was apparent that most of the injured
> gloried in their injuries. One leader was heard to say, 4
> These men have done a great work for India today. They are
> martyrs to the cause/
>
> Much of the time the stolid native Surat police seemed
> reluctant to strike. It was noticeable that when the
> officers were occupied on other parts of the line the
> police slackened, only to resume threatening and beating
> when the officers appeared again. I saw many instances of
> the volunteers pleading with the police to join them.
>
> At other times the police became angered, whereupon the
> beating would be done earnestly. During several of these
> incidents I saw the native police deliberately kick lying
> or sitting volunteers who refused to disperse. And I saw
> several instances where the police viciously jabbed
> sitting volunteers in the abdomen with the butt end of
> their lathi...
>
> Once I saw a native policeman in anger strike a
> half-submerged volunteer who had already been struck down
> into a ditch and was clinging to the edge of the bank.
> This incident caused great excitement among the volunteers
> who witnessed it.
>
> My reaction to the scenes was of revulsion akin to the
> emotion one feels when seeing a dumb animal
> beaten---partly anger, partly humiliation. It was to the
> description of these reactions that the Bombay censorship
> authorities objected among other things.
>
> In fairness to the authorities it must be emphasized that
> the Congress volunteers were breaking laws or attempting
> to break them, and that they repeatedly refused to
> disperse and attempted to pull down the entanglements with
> ropes, and that the volunteers seemed to glory in their
> injuries.
>
> In eighteen years of reporting in twenty-two countries,
> during which I have witnessed innumerable civil
> disturbances, riots, street fights and rebellions, I have
> never witnessed such harrowing scenes as at Dharasana. The
> Western mind can grasp violence returned by violence, can
> understand a fight, but is, I found, perplexed and baffled
> by the sight of men advancing coldly and deliberately and
> submitting to beating without attempting defence. Some
> times the scenes were so painful that I had to turn away
> momentarily.
>
> One surprising feature was the discipline of the
> volunteers. It seemed they were thoroughly imbued with the
> Gandhi's nonviolence creed, and the leaders constantly
> stood in front of the ranks imploring them to remember
> that Gandhi's soul was with them.

The Chicago "Daily News" published the following account
from Mr.Â Negley Farson, its special correspondent in India:

> Bombay, June 21.---Heroic, bearded Sikhs, several with
> blood dripping from their mouths, refusing to move or even
> to draw their 'kirpans' (sacred swords) to defend
> themselves from the shower of lathi blows--" Hindu women
> and girls dressed in orange robes of sacrifice, flinging
> themselves on the bridles of horses and imploring mounted
> police not to strike male Congress volunteers, as they
> were Hindus themselves---
>
> Stretcher bearers waiting beside little islands of
> prostrate unflinching, immovable Satyagrahis, who had
> flung themselves on the ground grouped about their women
> upholding the flag of Swaraj---
>
> These were the scenes on the Maidan Esplanade, Bombay's
> splendid sea-front park, where the six-day deadlock
> between police and Mahatma Gandhi's followers has broken
> out in a bewildering brutal and stupid yet heroic
> spectacle.
>
> The scene opened at six o'clock outside the Esplanade. At
> the police station facing the park some hundreds of yellow
> turbaned blue-clad, bare-legged Mahratti policemen were
> leaning on their dreaded bamboo lathis under the command
> of a score of English police sergeants in topees and
> cotton drill.
>
> At 6-45, marching in good formation down the tree-lined
> pleasant boulevard, came the first detachment of
> volunteers. This was the ambulance unit, mostly boys and
> young doctors, dressed in khaki with Red Cross badges on
> their arms. They marched past the waiting police without a
> glance to the south side of the playing field, where they
> parked their ambulances and brought out their stretchers.
>
> It was like nurses and orderlies preparing an operating
> theatre.
>
> At 7 o'clock began to come processions of white-robed
> volunteers bearing red, green and white banners, singing
> 'We will take Swaraj---India Our Motherland.' At the head
> of each walked a tiny detachment of women and girls
> dressed in orange robes, many garlanded with jasmine. They
> marched steadily on past the policemen and actually lined
> up behind the stretchers.
>
> They waited there in a long front down the boulevard for
> the order to march on the field.
>
> I shall not forget the scenes which followed. Dark-faced
> Mahratti policemen in their yellow turbans marched along
> in column led by English sergeants across the field toward
> the waiting crowd. As they neared it the police went
> faster and faster. The Hindus, who may be willing to die
> but dread physical pain, watched them approach with
> frightened eyes. Then the police broke into a charge.
>
> Many Hindus at once ran, fleeing down the streets---but
> most stood stock still.
>
> Crash! Whack! Whack! Whack! At last the crowd broke. Only
> the orange clad women were left standing beside the
> prostrate figures of crumpled men. Congress volunteer
> ambulances clanging bells, stretcher bearers running
> helter-skelter across the field. Whack! Whack! Whack!
>
> A minute's lull and then, with flags flying another column
> of volunteers marched on to the vast green field. A column
> of Mahrattas marched to meet them. They clashed---a clash,
> a rattle, dull thuds, then the faint-hearted ran and again
> there wns the spectacle of the green field dotted with a
> line of fallen bodies and again the same islands of orange
> clad Hindu women holding up the flags of Swaraj.
>
> Ahd here in the center of one of these islands sat a
> little knot of men, their heads bowed, submitting to a
> rain of lathi blows---refusing to move until on a
> stretcher and completely laid out. And there were
> stretchers within two feet of the suffering men, waiting
> for them.
>
> Then came a band of fifty Sikhs---and a heroic scene. The
> Sikhs, as you know, are a fierce fighting brotherhood. As
> soon as he can raise one, every man wears a beard which he
> curls around a cord or ties to his ears. The Sikhs also
> wear their hair long like women and curl it in a topknot
> under their turbans. These Sikhs were Akalis of a fanatic
> religious sect. They wore the kirpan, or sacred sword.
>
> With them were fifteen of their young girls and women. The
> women also wore sacred swords, and although dressed in
> orange saris like Hindu women, they wore little cotton
> trousers which reached to their tiny, sandaled feet. They
> were pretty girls and not so loud voiced and excited as
> the Hindu ladies. They simply smiled---as if they liked
> danger---which they do.
>
> One of them had her little baby, which she wanted to hold
> up before the police to dare them to come on. She laughed
> at me when my remark was translated that it was terrible
> to drag a child into this.
>
> Coming from all districts as representatives of the
> fighting Punjab, these Sikhs swore they would not draw
> their kirpans to defend themselves, but they would not
> leave the field. They did not.
>
> 'Never, never, never!' they cried, to the terrific delight
> of their Hindu brothers, in Swaraj. 'We will never
> retreat. We will die, we will!' The police hesitated
> before hitting the Sikhs. They asked their women would
> they not please, please, leave the field.
>
> 'No!' said the women, 'we will die with our men.'
>
> Mounted Indian policemen who had been galloping across the
> field, whacking heads indiscriminately, came to a stymie
> when they faced the little cluster of blue Akali turbans
> on the slender Sikh men.
>
> 'The Sikhs are brave men---how can we hit them?' It was
> not fear, but respect.
>
> But the police, determined to try to clear the field, at
> last rushed around the Sikh women and began to hit the
> men. I stood within five feet of a Sikh leader as he took
> the lathi blows. He was a short, heavily muscled man.
>
> The blows came---he stood straight. His turban was knocked
> off. The long black hair was bared with the round topknot.
> He closed his eyes as the blows fell---until at last he
> swayed and fell to the ground.
>
> No other Sikhs had tried to shield him, but now, shouting
> their defiance, they wiped away the blood streaming from
> his mouth. Hysterical Hindus rushed to him, bearing cakes
> of ice to rub the contusions over his eyes. The Sikh gave
> me a smile---and stood for more.
>
> And then the police threw up their hands. 'You can't go on
> hitting a blighter when he stands up to you like that.'

In addition to the foregoing examples, we have witnessed in
China immensely effective economic boycotts against foreign
goods. These were predominantly non-violent in outward form,
but to outsiders, at least, the principle of non-violence
seemed to be not so much a matter of conscious choice as of
social habit. Chinese histories also tell us that the
Chinese people have often used nonviolent resistance toward
their own rulers. The Jews have also been non-violent for
the last 1900 years.

The principle of non-violent resistance had already been
conceived and applied independently by numerous seers and
courageous people in many different countries. Among them
were Lao Tsu, Confucius, Buddha, the Jain Tirthankaras,
Jesus Christ, St.Â Francis of Assisi, George Fox, Leo Tolstoy
and many others too numerous to mention. But Gandhi is the
outstanding person in modern times who has worked out the
theory and applied it to mass movements in organized
corporate fashion, and proved the validity of this extension
by actual successful campaigns in numerous difficult
situations.

Is non-violent resistance only for use by intellectuals,
saints or ascetics? Is it adapted only to Oriental
psychology and modes of thinking, feeling, acting and
living? Not at all. Its record shows successful use by
illiterate peasants and city-bred intellectuals, by saints
and the ordinary run of mankind; rich men and poor, property
owners and homeless vagabonds, by meat eaters and
vegetarians, Europeans, Americans, Negroes, Chinese,
Japanese and Indians, by the religiously minded and those
not so accounted. It has been used successfully in
political, economic, and social conflicts. It has been used
by individuals and by groups, both large and small.[^9]

Knowing that non-violent resistance has actually been used
with success, at least in certain instances, let us now try
to understand how and why it works.

# II. Moral Jiujitsu

Most people hitherto have been sceptical of nonviolent
resistance simply because they could not understand how it
could possibly work. They might be less sceptical if they
could once see how the method could operate and be
effective. Let us then try to understand first how
non-violent resistance works. Later we may estimate the
probabilities of its success in general use. Modern
psychology enables us to understand the emotional, mental
and moral mechanisms involved. So let us analyse the matter
and pay attention to one part of the problem at a time. We
will consider first its operation by individuals and later
its use by organized groups of people.

If one man attacks another with physical violence and the
victim hits back, the violent response gives the attacker a
certain reassurance and moral support. It shows that the
victim's scale of moral values in regard to violence as a
mode of settling questions is the same as that of the
attacker. A mere display of either fear or anger by the
victim is sufficient to have this effect. It makes the
attacker sure of his own savoir-faire, of his choice of
methods, of his knowledge of human nature and hence of his
opponent. He can rely on the victim's reacting in a definite
way. The attacker's morale is sustained, his sense of values
is vindicated. His confidence in his general method of
dealing with his opponent is reassured.

But suppose the assailant attacks with physical violence a
different sort of person. The attitude of this new opponent
is fearless, calm, steady, and because of a different
belief, training or experience he has much self-control. He
does not respond to the attacker's violence with
counter-violence. Instead, he accepts the blows with
good-tempered reasoning, stating his belief as to the truth
of the matter in dispute, asking for an examination of both
sides of the dispute, and stating his readiness to abide by
the truth. He offers resistance, but only in moral terms. He
states his readiness to prove his sincerity by his own
suffering rather than by imposing suffering on the
assailant, through violence. He accepts blow after blow,
showing no signs of fear or shrinking or resentment, keeping
steadily good humoured and kindly in look of eye, tone of
voice, and posture of body and arms. To violence he opposes
non-violent resistance.

The assailant's first thought may be that the opponent is
afraid of him, is a coward, ready to give way and
acknowledge defeat. But the opponent's look and posture show
not fear but courage. His steady resistance of will reveals
no subservience. His unflinching endurance of pain is
startling.[^10]

At such an unusual and unexpected reaction the assailant
will be surprised. If at first he was inclined to be
scornful or contemptuous of the victim as a coward, those
feelings rapidly become displaced by curiosity and wonder.
As the psychologist Shand points out, "Wonder tends to
exclude Repugnance, Disgust and Contempt in relation to its
object."[^11]

Thus non-violent resistance acts as a sort of moral
jiujitsu. The non-violence and good will of the victim act
like the lack of physical opposition by the user of physical
jiujitsu, to cause the attacker to lose his moral balance.
He suddenly and unexpectedly loses the moral support which
the usual violent resistance of most victims would render
him. He plunges forward, as it were, into a new world of
values. He feels insecure because of the novelty of the
situation and his ignorance of how to handle it. He loses
his poise and self-confidence. The victim not only lets the
attacker come, but, as it were, pulls him forward by
kindness, generosity and voluntary suffering, so that the
attacker quite loses his moral balance. The user of
non-violent resistance, knowing what he is doing and having
a more creative purpose and perhaps a clearer sense of
ultimate values than the other, retains his moral balance.
He uses the leverage of a superior wisdom to subdue the
rough direct force or physical strength of his opponent.
[^12]

Another way to state it is that between two persons in
physically violent combat there may appear to be complete
disagreement, but in reality they conduct their fight on the
basis of a strong fundamental agreement that violence is a
sound mode of procedure. Hence if one of the parties
eliminates that basic agreement and announces by his actions
that he has abandoned the method used generally by his
forefathers back almost to the beginning of animal
life,---no wonder that the other is startled and uncertain.
His animal instincts no longer tell him instantly what to
do. He feels that he has plunged into a new world. Here is
something as new, apparently, as an airplane to an Eskimo.

Just as in the case of wrestling jiujitsu, the violence
itself helps to overthrow its user. There are several
reasons for this, in addition to the element of surprise.

The first is that prolonged anger is very exhausting.
Undoubtedly anger at first gives an access of muscular and
sometimes mental energy.[^13] But it also consumes energy
very rapidly, and if long sustained it may completely
exhaust the person feeling it.[^14]

Secondly, part of the energy of the violent assailant is
reverted and used up against himself. The steadfast appeals
of an individual non-violent resister work in the
personality of the violent attacker, arousing the latter's
more decent and kindly motives and putting them in conflict
with his fighting, aggressive instincts. Thus the attacker's
personality is divided. The appeals, like commercial
advertising, may require considerable repetition before they
are effective, but the result is pretty sure. They act on
the psychological principle of "summation of stimuli."[^15]

The violent assailant realizes that he made a mistake at
first in thinking that his opponent was a coward. He is
bothered by the thought that he may have made or might in
the future make another mistake about this unusual opponent,
and that another mistake might be more embarrassing. He
therefore becomes more cautious.

If there are onlookers, the assailant soon loses still more
poise. Instinctively he dramatizes himself before them and
becomes more aware of his position. With the audience as a
sort of mirror, he realizes the contrast between his own
conduct and that of the victim. In relation to the
onlookers, the attacker with his violence perhaps begins to
feel a little excessive and undignified,---even a little
ineffective; and by contrast with the victim, less generous
and in fact brutal. He realizes that the onlookers noted his
mistake in regard to the nature of his adversary. He senses
a lessening of respect from the crowd. He realizes he has
lost prestige. He somewhat loses his inner
self-respect,---has a sense of inferiority. He of course
does not want to acknowledge it, but his feelings betray
themselves in hesitance or decreasing firmness of manner,
speech or glance. The onlookers perceive it, and he himself
senses a loss of public support.

If anyone feels inclined to doubt such a reaction of the
outsiders against the assailant's violence, let him recall
what happens in time of a labour strike if any striker loses
his temper and destroys property or attacks any person.
Immediately the employers blazon the news in the press and
try to make it appear that all the strikers are men of
violence and that public safety is threatened. They play on
the fears of the public and then persuade the mayor to call
out extra police or soldiers. Public opinion, swayed by the
press, reacts strongly against the strikers and their cause
is lost. Violence opposed not by violence but by courageous
non-violence, if it is in the open, is sure sooner or later
to react against the attacker. The burden of justification
rests heavily on the violent one and the presumption is
against himJ

The disadvantage of the attacker increases by reason of a
further loss of inner assurance. He becomes increasingly
aware that the victim's scale of values is strangely
different from his own and from most people's. He dimly
realizes that the courage of the non-violent opponent is
higher than mere physical bravery or recklessness;---that it
is somehow a clearer and stronger realization of human
nature or perhaps of some ultimate powers or realities in
the background of life. He is surprised into an uncertainty
of his own valuations and methods.

A final disadvantage and continuing cause of relative
weakness in the attacker is that he is in a very suggestible
and receptive state of mind and emotion,---more so than the
non-violent resister. The reasons for this are several. The
emotion of the struggle of course tends to make both parties
suggestible.[^16] But the surprising conduct and attitude of
the victim presents suddenly a new idea to the
attacker.[^17] "The effect of surprise is to make us attend
to the event that surprises us.---Wonder tends to arrest and
detain the attention on the thing which excites it." to The
struggle is a process of mutual interacting influence. As
this process proceeds there is a cumulative effect of the
several disabilities of the violent assailant as above
described, together with advantages of the nonviolent
opponent which we are about to set forth. This cumulative
effect acts upon the subconsciousness and imagination of the
attacker to keep him more suggestible than the non-violent
resister. Thus the violent assailant has less chance of
influencing the opponent than the opponent has of
influencing him.

So much for the factors that tend to upset the moral balance
of the violent assailant and keep him off-balance and at a
disadvantage. What are the advantages of the non-violent
resister?

In this moral jiujitsu the non-violent person has superior
position, poise and power for many reasons. Firstly, he has
taken the moral initiative. His conduct is new and
unexpected and unpredictable by the conservatively acting
user of violence. Secondly, he is not surprised. He knows,
by reasoning or by intuition and faith, what is really
taking place in such a struggle, and how to control the
process. Thirdly, his self-control and lack of anger
conserves his energy. Moreover, he is not in as suggestible
a condition as the violent assailant.

He has still another element of superior power,---his proved
sincerity and conviction. Deep conviction is a great power.
Some writer has said, "To be willing to suffer and die for a
cause is an incontestible proof of sincere belief, and
perhaps in most cases the only incontestible proof."
Non-violence coupled with such suffering is still further
proof of sincerity. Voluntary suffering is probably also a
sure sign that the whole being of the sufferer,---body,
mind, will and spirit, is integrated and at work with single
purpose. This means that immense and unpredictable resources
of energy are in action and ready to endure. The sight and
realization of this is profoundly impressive and moving.

Again, the refusal of the victim to use violence is a strong
indication of his respect for the personality and moral
integrity of the assailant. From childhood we all tend to
like people who show respect for our personality. This
tendency operates even between the parties to a conflict.
Such respect for the personality of the opponent was one of
the important elements in the practice of mediaeval European
chivalry, and added much to the charm and power of that
code. Respect for personality is a prerequisite for real
freedom and fine human association. It is proof of
unselfishness and of moral poise and understanding. If, as
at least two distinguished psychologists believe,[^18] the
self-regarding sentiment is the foundation of all the higher
morality, a demonstration of respect for personality
exercises a much deeper and more far-reaching influence than
is generally realized. This respect gradually tends to put
the violent attacker to shame and to enhance the respect of
any onlookers toward the gentle resister.

Both opponents feel a desire and need for the approbation of
others. Social approval and opprobrium are very strong
forces. They act through and are a part of the herd or
gregarious instinct which is so powerful in mankind.[^19]
The tremendous pressure of social approval or dislike is
well brought out in W. Trotter's "Instincts of the Herd in
Peace and War."[^20] Competent observers have stated that
fear of social disapproval was the strongest of all the
motives to enlistment in the armies in the World War.[^21]
The desire for outside approval was strikingly shown by the
great efforts devoted to propaganda by all the parties of
the World War. Again, it is demonstrated in labour strikes
and lockouts, in which both parties are at great pains to
win public support and sympathy. All politicians recognize
the force of public opinion.

For these reasons, in a struggle between a violent person
and a non-violent resister, if there are any onlookers or a
public who hear of the conflict, the nonviolent resister
gains a very strong advantage from their reaction. When the
public see the gentle person's courage and fortitude, note
his generosity and good will toward the attacker, and hear
his repeated offers to settle the matter fairly and
peaceably and in the open, they are filled with surprise,
curiosity and wonder. If they have been hostile to the
victim before, they at least pause to think. His good
humour, fairness and kindness arouse confidence. Sooner or
later his conduct wins public sympathy, admiration, and
support, and also the respect of the violent opponent
himself. Gandhi's chivalrous and generous conduct toward the
South African Government when it was threatened by a railway
strike is an instance of this sort. Once the respect of the
opponent has been secured, a long step has been taken toward
a satisfactory solution of the controversy, no matter
whether it be public or private.

But what is the psychology of the affair if the assailant is
filled with the sort of cruelty or greed, pride, bigotry, or
hardness that seems to grow on what it feeds on?

Cruelty is a complex of fear, anger and pride.[^22] Greed is
really a desire for security and completion, though badly
mistaken as to method, means and material. In a sense it is
a fear of lack. Pride is another mistaken sense of
divisiveness. Bigotry is an obstinate narrow religious
pride.

In all such instances the tendency of non-violent resistance
is to remove fear, anger, and any foreboding or dread of
loss or sense of separateness,[^23] and to give instead a
feeling of security, unity, sympathy, and good will.
Inasmuch as fear and anger are elements of cruelty, the
removal of fear and anger will tend to reduce cruelty. Shand
tells us[^24] that "wonder tends to exclude Repugnance,
Disgust and Contempt in relation to its object." In so far
as these may be elements involved in pride, the wonder
evoked by the conduct of the non-violent person also tends
to reduce pride and hence to reduce cruelty. In so far as
cruelty is due to a desire for power or for feeling
superior, the ability of non-violent resistance to win for
its user the support of the outside public presently makes
the cruel person realize that that sort of power is
disadvantageous and that perhaps he is not so superior as he
had previously supposed. Even aside from its effect on the
spectators, non-violent resistance gradually creates even in
the violent opponent a partial realization of human unity
and a different idea of what kind of power is desirable. To
the extent that cruelty may be due to a defect in the cruel
person's intelligence or imagination or to dullness of
observation, the dramatic scenes of prolonged non-violent
resistance act to stimulate his intelligence and powers of
observation, and hence to reduce his cruelty. If avarice,
ambition, or desire for revenge are factors in a particular
case of cruelty, these also are reduced by prolonged
non-violent resistance. The removal of fear or of sense of
separateness tends to reduce greed and hardness.

The attacker gradually loses divisive emotions or sentiments
in relation to the victim,---fear, anger, hatred,
indignation, pride, vanity, scorn, contempt, disdain,
disgust, anxiety, worry, apprehension. It is not that such
feelings are balked or suppressed;---they merely no longer
have a cause or basis.

The art of jiujitsu is based on a knowledge of balance and
how to disturb it. In a struggle of moral jiujitsu the
retention of moral balance seems to depend upon the
qualities of one's relationship to moral truth. Hence part
of the superior power of the non-violent resister seems to
lie in the nature of his character.

He must have primarily that disposition best known as
love;---an interest in people so deep, and determined, and
lasting as to be creative; a profound knowledge of or faith
in the ultimate possibilities of human nature; a courage
based upon a conscious or subconscious realization of the
underlying unity of all life and eternal values or eternal
life of the human spirit; a strong and deep desire for and
love of truth; and a humility which is not cringing or
self-deprecatory or timid but rather a true sense of
proportion in regard to people, things, qualities and
ultimate values. These human traits of love, faith, courage,
honesty and humility exist in greater or less strength in
every person. By self-training and discipline they can be
developed sufficiently to make a good nonviolent "soldier"
out of average human material. Of course, leaders of a
non-violent movement require these qualities to an unusual
degree, just as generals of military armies require military
qualities developed to a higher degree than those of the
common soldier.

Not only is love the most important of all these qualities
of the non-violent person; it may almost be considered the
origin of all the others. If the name "love" in such a
context seems too impossible or sentimental, call it a sort
of intelligence or knowledge.[^25] This love must be strong
and clear-sighted, not mawkish or sentimental. It does not
state or hint that it is going to "do good to" the other
person, nor does it make a parade of itself. It must be
patient and full of insight and understanding and
imagination. It must be enduring, kind and unselfish. It is
wonderful but it is not super-human or exceedingly rare.

We have all seen such love in many mothers of all classes,
nations and races, also in the best teachers. Its
creativeness in these instances is well known.

If through love for your enemy you can create in him respect
or admiration for you, this provides the best possible means
by which your new idea or suggestion to him will become an
auto-suggestion within him, and it will also help nourish
that auto-suggestion.

Anger, as well as love, can be creative, for both are
expressions or modes of energy. But love contains more
energy and endurance than anger. Love involves the very
principle and essence of continuity of life itself. If
considered as an instrument, it can be more efficiently and
effectively wielded, has better aim, has a better fulcrum or
point of vantage, than anger. Love gains a stronger and more
lasting approval from the rest of mankind. The probabilities
in favour of its winning over anger in the long run are
strong.

But if one party to a contest cannot develop toward the
conflict or toward his opponent an attitude that is creative
or akin to love, he should certainly be honest and true to
himself.[^26] As long as men have uncontrollable anger or
enmity in their feelings it is better to express it honestly
and courageously than to be hypocritical and refuse to fight
out of cowardice. Christ, searching for a change in men more
profound and important than immediate external acts, told
them to get rid of anger and greed, knowing that if this
took place, war would disappear.

Courageous violence, to try to prevent or stop a wrong, is
better than cowardly acquiescence. Cowardice is more harmful
morally than violence. The inner attitude is more important
than the outer act, though it is vitally important always to
be true to oneself, to make one's outer conduct a true
reflection and expression of one's inner state. Fear
develops out of an assumption of relative weakness. Since
all men have the innate possibility of moral strength, to be
afraid is really a denial of one's moral potential powers
and is therefore very harmful. Violence and anger at least
show faith in one's own moral powers and thus provide at
least a basis for further growth. He who refrains from
fighting because he is afraid, really hates his opponent in
his heart and wishes that circumstances would change so that
he could hurt or destroy his opponent. The energy of his
hate is present but suppressed. If one has not the special
courage or discipline or conviction to resist wrong or
violence without counter-violence, then I agree with Gandhi
that it is better to be violent than to be cowardly.[^27]
But he who has the courage to fight and yet refrains, is the
true non-violent resister. Because the coward fears, he
cannot love, and if he cannot love he cannot be wholly
successful in nonviolent resistance. He cannot use this
moral jiujitsu completely effectively. Refraining from
outward violent acts through fearless self-control of anger
is better than acting violently; but getting rid of anger is
best of all, and the only sure way. True non-violent
resistance, where the outer act is an expression of inner
attitude, gradually creates among all beholders an awareness
of essential human unity. But if the inner condition is one
of anger or hate, cowardly non-violence of deed is
inconsistent with the inner condition, and this cowardly
inconsistency or insincerity is soon detected by others and
perhaps openly called hypocrisy; and this inconsistency
makes impossible any considerable increase in the awareness
of essential unity.

As to the outcome of a struggle waged by non-violence, we
must understand one point thoroughly. The aim of the
non-violent resister is not to injure, or crush and
humiliate his opponent, or to "break his will," as in a
violent fight. The aim is to convert the opponent, to change
his understanding and his sense of values so that he will
join wholeheartedly with the resister in seeking a
settlement truly amicable and truly satisfying to both
sides. The non-violent resister seeks a solution under which
both parties can have complete self-respect and mutual
respect; a settlement that will implement the new desires
and full energies of both parties. The non-violent resister
seeks to help the violent attacker re-establish his moral
balance on a level higher and more secure than that from
which he first launched his violent attack. The method
withdraws a mistaken support not in order to harm the
opponent but to help both parties into a more secure,
creative, happy, and truthful relationship.[^28]

# III. What Happens

What more is there about the subtle interplay of forces
operating during the struggle? For purposes of explanation,
we may somewhat arbitrarily analyse and consider these
forces in two groups,---those which are mainly unconscious
and those which are mainly conscious. In operation they are
all inextricably mingled, but our minds can understand the
matter better by discussing the processes as if they were
separate.

One of these processes is what psychologists call
suggestion. The surprising conduct of the non-violent
resister presents suddenly to the violent assailant the new
ideas that the dispute can be settled calmly and amicably;
that calm conduct is more dignified, more decent, more
efficient, more worthy of respect than violence; that there
are some values and imponderable forces in the. world
perhaps even more powerful and desirable than physical
force; that the position of the attacker is much less
favourable than he at first thought; that perhaps the two
parties are not enemies after all.

The attacker is at the moment in a most receptive and
suggestible state, as we pointed out in the previous
chapter. He is excited, and, because of his wonder, his
attention is spontaneously concentrated on these new ideas.
Under such conditions suggestion acts most potently.

"Suggestion is essentially a process of the
unconscious."[^29] Sensitiveness to folk environment is
instinctive and therefore subconscious.[^30]

It is well known that subconscious suggestions are both
powerful and lasting. The spectacle of bravely endured
suffering along with all the surprises and uncertainty of
the situation creates emotion in the attacker. If there is a
crowd present, it tends to heighten his suggestibility.
These suggestions tend to change h:s inner attitude.

Or we may state it thus. If you would conquer another man,
do it not by outside resistance but by creating inside his
own personality an impulse too strong for his previous
tendency. Reinforce your suggestion by making it
autosuggestion in him, so that it lives by his energy
instead of by yours. And yet that new impulse is not to
conflict directly with his former urge, but to divert and
blend with it and absorb it, so as to use the full
psychological energy of both impulses. That is the wisest
psychological dynamics and moral strategy.

The new ideas in the astonishing situation tend strongly to
stimulate the attacker's imagination. The Nancy school of
psychologists maintains that imagination and suggestion
together are much stronger than conscious will power, so
that if a person consciously wills and thinks that he
desires to accomplish a given purpose but all the while his
imagination is filled with ideas of his inability to
accomplish it or of some contrary desire, then he will
surely fail in the task. Baudouin states it as the "Law of
Reversed Effort." He says, "When the will and imagination
are at war, the imagination *invariably* gains the
day."[^31]

If this be so, it may be that the ideas thus suggested to
the attacker gradually capture his imagination and conquer
his will to defeat the victim by violence. The Freudians
show how much more powerful is a repressed wish than an
opposing conscious desire. Possibly a suggestion acting
imaginatively in the subconsciousness is as powerful as a
repressed wish.

Undoubtedly the sight of another person voluntarily
undergoing suffering for a belief or ideal moves the
assailant and beholders alike and tends to change their
hearts and make them all feel kinship with the sufferer.

There are perhaps two reasons for this. One is as follows.
Our ancestors from the dawn of life have suffered pain and
deprivation, so extensively and so intensely in the long
course of evolution, that suffering is very familiar to our
entire nervous system. Indeed,, it is almost habitual to the
human species. Probably the nervous system is as much or
more responsive or sensitive to all stimuli associated with
pain than to any other type of stimulus. Hence the sight of
suffering, in all probability, causes an involuntary
sympathetic response in the nervous system of the beholder,
especially in the autonomic nervous system. The response may
be inhibited or crusted over by custom, prejudice or hostile
emotions, but it is there, nevertheless, at least in the
subconsciousness. Therefore, the spectacle of a non-violent
resister submitting himself voluntarily to bodily suffering
for the sake of his cause would rouse in the onlooker,
sympathetic emotion and a sense of kinship. If the sight
were prolonged or frequently repeated, the effect would be
all the stronger. There seems to be a social as well as an
individual subconsciousness, through which such feelings
would function.[^32]

Again, everyone wants, in his heart, to be strong and brave.
Every child has dreamed and fancied itself heroic.
Therefore, when we see suffering valiantly endured, we
admire the sufferer, we wonder if we could do so well, and
perhaps we even unconsciously identify ourselves with him.
Such processes of the imagination tend to produce a feeling
of sympathy.

Thus the voluntary, long sustained, steady, disciplined
suffering of a non-violent resister acts as a powerful
suggestion of human unity.

Another process affecting the attacker is unconscious
imitation. Imitation is an exceedingly powerful force by
which we learn to talk and walk, learn skilled manual
trades, pick up gestures and postures of our elders, follow
our leaders,---a limitless range of conduct. It lasts
throughout life. Rivers tells us that "Unwitting imitation
is the most effective."[^33]

Ross remarks[^34] that " Motor impulses appear to diffuse
themselves with great facility," citing the infectiousness
of marching rhythm, yawning, gestures, and modes of speech.
Also that "The feelings are more contagious than the
appetites"... "Emotions spread more rapidly than ideas or
opinions."... "Volitions are extremely communicable."

Kempf,[^35] after giving numerous examples of conscious and
unconscious imitation, says, "The influence of associates
upon the personality is a physiological mechanism and occurs
unconsciously, or at least begins unconsciously." Later[^36]
he partially adopts Holt's theory that "thought is latent
course of action with regard to environment," that is to say
"the preceding labile interplay of motor settings." This
suggests the reason why pupils learn â¢ better by personal
discussion with the teacher than by reading a book. They can
imitate unconsciously the postures, tonus and play of motor
settings of the teacher and thus follow and understand the
thought more clearly and surely. Such a mode of influence
would be both subtle and powerful. Similarly when an
attacker watches his victim and comes to respect his
courage, be it ever so little, he begins unconsciously to
imitate him, and hence the attacker's wrath tends to
subside. Whatever truth there may be in the James-Lange
theory of the emotions would add weight to this conjecture.
For reasons already considered, the peaceful contestant is
less apt to be influenced by suggestion and imitation, to
adopt violence, than the violent person to be influenced
toward nonviolence.

If one doubts the existence of imitation in time of
conflict, let him remember the words of the great theorist
of war, von Clausewitz, "War is a constant case of
reciprocal action, the effects of which are mutual."[^37]
Again Lieut.-General von Caemmerer, in his "Development of
Strategical Science,"[^38] says, "Every action in war is
saturated with mental forces and effects... War is a
constant reciprocal effect of action of both parties."[^39]
This is true also of a conflict between individuals.

This factor of imitation also helps explain the futility of
violence as a means of solving conflicts. If A attacks B,
and B responds with violence, while part of B's response is
purely instinctive and defensive, part of it also is
unconscious imitation of A. Then the two act like front and
back logs in a fire. The heat of one log is reflected across
to the other, which then fires up and sends more heat to the
first. The heat is reflected back and forth,, steadily
increasing and consuming the material (latent energy) of the
wood. So anger, resentment, hatred and revenge, in the
process of reciprocal imitative violence, mount higher and
enter into more and more of the personalities of the
combatants, consuming all their energies, to the point of
utter exhaustion or destruction.[^40]

Non-violent resistance is in effect a sort of language, a
means of communicating feelings and ideas. It uses the
expression of the face, glances of the eye, tones,
intensities and modulations of the voice, movements and
postures of the limbs and body,---just as in all personal
communication. In prolonged situations it may also use
writing and printing. Its means of expression are as ample
as those of any language. Even in situations where words can
be used little or not at all, conduct alone may be a rapid,
accurate, and efficient means of communication.[^41]

Nevertheless, the ideas to be conveyed are so unusual that
the understanding of them by the recipient may be slow or
incomplete. At first and perhaps for some time, the
understanding will be more emotional than intellectual.
Therefore, the success of the communication does not depend
upon the extent of formal or book education of either party
to the conflict. The idea itself is no more complex than
that of war, for war involves a discipline of fear, and
non-violent resistance involves a discipline of anger; and
both anger and fear are elemental and similar emotions.
There is both an emotional and an intellectual element to be
transmitted,---both feelings and ideas. There will be
difficulties arising from the unusualness of the feelings
and ideas, but no more difficulties arising from inadequacy
of means than in the case of any other sort of
language.[^42]

Another largely unconscious process at work is the creative
power of trust and expectation evinced by the non-violent
resister. He tries to give concrete and repeated evidence of
his trust in the decency and reasonableness of the violent
attacker, and of his expectation that this fine spirit,
perhaps only latent at the start, will grow stronger until
it informs, control's, and changes the assailant into
non-violent and kindly ways. This belief gives the resister
hope, and he acts and holds himself in an attitude of
expectancy and trust. Trust, like its grosser form of
financial credit, is subtly but powerfully creative. An
example of this firm attitude of expectancy and hope was
shown by Gandhi in going to the second Round Table
Conference at London in 1931. Although no results of it were
then visible in the British Government, there is evidence of
considerable effect upon numerous persons who met Gandhi
privately at that time.[^43]

Modern psychologists tell us that much the greater part of
our mind is subconscious. If the total mind may be likened
to an iceberg floating in the water, one tenth of whose bulk
is above the surface and nine tenths below the surface of
the water, the importance of the conscious mind resembles
the small part above the level of the water; the
subconscious mind is equivalent to the greater bulk under
the water. If this analogy be true, it is clear that forces
or processes which operate upon a person's
subconsciousness,---whether the process be one of
suggestion, imagination-stimulus, imitation, communication,
or trust,---would have a greater effect than those which
operate only or chiefly upon the conscious mind and
conscious feelings. This would presumably hold true of a
group as well as of an individual. The analogy may be
carried further. When an iceberg drifts into warm waters the
submerged part melts and melts, with perhaps only slight
changes visible above the surface. But after the melting
underneath has gone far enough, sometimes the entire iceberg
suddenly turns over and thereafter looks entirely different.
So sometimes sudden reversals come about among people as a
result of forces acting a long time on the subconsciousness.
It is not a miracle, but merely an instance of the operation
of forces which we usually ignore. The analogy would tend to
explain in part some of the impressive results of Gandhi's
march to the sea in 1930 to make salt in defiance of the
British Government.

The total effect of these psychological processes taking
place in the mind and heart of the violent opponent can best
be described by the word "conversion." Probably the process
is analogous to that of religious conversion,, though in
this case the change is moral rather than religious. The
process may be explained as follows:

Every civilized person possesses in either his conscious or
subconscious mind a store of elementary moral memories. Some
of these are myths, fables, stories or other fictitious
events which, as a child, he took for realities; some are
moral relationships or moral standards impressed upon the
individual at various stages in his development. Some of
these have been repressed because they were inconsistent
with subsequent courses of conduct. Others have been
forgotten simply from lack of use or lack of attention. Each
such residue of former beliefs or impressions is composed of
representational, emotional, and motor factors associated
into a unit, and each of these units seems to have more or
less psychic energy.

During a prolonged struggle between a non-violent resister
and a violent opponent, the psychological processes which we
have described, together with the emotional and moral
perturbation caused thereby, operate apparently to recall to
consciousness some of the forgotten elemental fragments of
moral memories, to dissociate some of the complexes and
sentiments which have been controlling the violent person's
conduct, to separate from those complexes and sentiments
their emotional tone and psychic energy, and transfer such
emotion and energy to some of those revived memories, or to
form a fresh combination of such psychic elements and attach
the emotion and psychic energy to those new combinations.
The psychologists of the psycho-analytical school call this
shifting of emotional tone and energy "displacement." Along
with this shifting of the representational, feeling, and
motor factors of the psychic units, and their re-association
into new "constellations," the experiences of the struggle
also tend to induce in the attacker a sublimation of his
desires and energies,---a lifting of them to a more social
level, a re-directing of them in a more inclusive synthesis
in which they can be reconciled with more of the finer
ideals of human association.[^44]

Non-violent resistance in complete form is a dramatization
of the idea of essential human unity. Therefore, with all
the subtle power of sincere drama, it works upon the mind
and heart of the opponent. In this drama the movement and
confronting of ideas and forces probably causes in the
opponent and spectator a clearer and profounder realization
of human relationships, a reconciliation of impulses, and an
illumination, enlargement, and enrichment of consciousness.
It probably brings about a more highly organized and more
delicately balanced synthesis of the elements in the
spectator's experience, an inner organization "less wasteful
of human possibilities"[^45] than that which prevailed in
him before. It reveals the power of the human soul, its
ability to triumph over suffering and apparent disaster.

In addition to these processes which are mainly subconscious
in their operation, there are others which are perhaps
chiefly conscious.

The psychological nature of non-violent resistance may well
be considered a form of what Rivers called "manipulative
activity". In discussing different modes of reaction to
danger, he says,[^46]

> "In the presence of danger man, in the vast majority of
> cases, neither flees nor adopts an attitude of aggression,
> but responds by the special kind of activity, often of a
> highly complex kind, whereby the danger may be avoided or
> overcome. Prom most of the dangers to which mankind is
> exposed in the complex conditions of our own society, the
> means to escape lie in complex activities of a
> manipulative kind which seem to justify the term I have
> chosen. The hunter has to discharge his weapon, perhaps
> combined with movements which put him into a favourable
> situation for such an action. The driver of a car and the
> pilot of an aeroplane in danger of collision have to
> perform complex movements by which the danger is avoided."

We may say that non-violent resistance is a sort of moral
manipulative activity in which the factors used and operated
upon are largely psychological.

It may clarify our thinking somewhat to remember that we are
not considering two static entities, an angry person versus
a kindly person. We are rather dealing with two natures and
an environment which are all mobile and changing, each
constantly acting on the other,---influencing, changing,
then responding to the new condition thus created.\[\^47\]

Another process develops after the struggle has proceeded
some time,---namely that of reassurance of the violent
party. Much of the opponent's original basis of anger or
fear is removed. The assailant finds that the resister does
not bear enmity toward him. He finds that at least his
"better self" and potentialities are respected instead of
humiliated; he finds his original desires so illuminated and
transmuted that in their new form they may be more easily
satisfied. He finds the resister always ready to negotiate
and showing and inviting him to take a dignified way by
which he, the assailant, may quickly regain his self-respect
and public esteem. Since he has been provided with a
satisfactory road for action, he is not left with any
"balked disposition" as Graham Wallas calls it.

Then comes the stage of what Miss M. P. Follett calls
"integration In her very thoughtful book,"Creative
Experience,"[^47] she shows that either voluntary submission
of one side, struggle and victory of one side over the
other, or a compromise, are all highly unsatisfactory and
productive of further trouble. She then explains a fourth
way,"integration".

Integration is arrived at by first analysing the expressed
desires of the opponents into their elements and more
fundamental meanings. For instance, to take a simple case,
an insistence on having a table in a certain place in a room
might really mean a wish to have light on one's writing
while working at the table, together with an inability to
see how it could be secured in any other way. The desire of
Russia to control the Dardenelles may really mean a desire
for security in free trade. Insistence upon following a
given kind of trade may mean a need for employment, a desire
for money, and a desire to satisfy pride. An insistence upon
political control of a certain territory may mean a need for
food and industrial raw material and a desire to satisfy
pride, and an inability to see how the satisfaction of these
needs can be made wholly secure in any other way.

The integration consists of inventing and working out a
wholly new solution, perhaps involving very different
activities, which satisfies all or most of the fundamental
desires and needs of both parties in a situation, and
utilizes freely and fully the energies of both without
balking or suppression. The integration requires preliminary
analysis, then an invention of a new solution which gives
free scope to the energies of all parties concerned.
Inevitably the solution is satisfying all around.

It takes much creative intelligence and ingenuity to find
integrations, and not all differences can be integrated
immediately. Temporary compromises can be made, however,
pending the further search and alterations due to passage of
time, ending in an ultimate integration.[^48]

In this connection it is well to remember the importance of
love. Love for an opponent makes possible the sympathetic
appreciation of the real meaning and value of the opponent's
contentions, positions, and desires, and gives a willingness
to approach them open-mindedly, creating the right
atmosphere for an integration of both sets of interests to a
higher plane of action. Also it induces a frame of mind in
the opponent which leads him to understand *your* needs,
contentions, etc. And it shows the opponent that you are so
appreciative of his side of the case that he can safely
trust you.

Miss Follett's idea of integration indicates that nonviolent
resistance, as a method, by itself does not necessarily
settle all the conflict. It may be said to solve most of the
emotional part,---the fear, anger, pride, etc.,---while the
rest of the conflict may have to be solved by keen and
perhaps prolonged intellectual exploration, with the new
emotional attitude always at its elbow to help over the
tight places.

All this ebb and flow of feeling and action and discussion
may take place in different order from that described above.
Its temper and intensity may vary according to the
circumstances and character of the persons involved. It
might take a considerable time to work through. Between
sensitive persons the course of feelings and actions might
be almost instantaneous. With a very proud or self-deceiving
person, or a hardened soldier or policeman as attacker, the
actual violence might be severe and repeated and lasting
before the change of attitude or heart of the attacker would
come about. Yet even among such attackers the surprise and
wonder would be so great as often to cause a far quicker
face-about and solution than might at first be expected.

And when a solution is found there is satisfaction and good
feeling and finer attitude and action not only among the
participants to the struggle but among all the onlookers and
public. To have the finer potentialities of men flower forth
and bear fruit enhances the morale of all who learn of it.

# IV. Utilizing Emotional Energy

As a method of solving a conflict, non-violent resistance is
sounder than reciprocal violence because it is more
efficient.[^49]

The first reason for this is partly physiological. Anger,
hatred, and fear make aft enormous drain upon our
energy.[^50] Hatred eats up our energies and our
imaginations. If you hate a man sufficiently, you cannot get
him out of your mind, you are attached to him, you are his
slave. The thought of him is an obsession; it wastes most of
your time.

In a violent struggle these emotions persist after the
combat itself ceases. A victory by violence means
humiliation for the conquered. He has had to admit the
winner's superiority for the moment but he vows vengeance.
His resentment seeks satisfaction as soon as possible. His
original anger, repressed by circumstances, becomes hatred
and longs for revenge and retaliation. He nurses his grudge.
His sympathetic family or friends may make his case their
own. Perhaps a feud or vendetta develops. There have been
many instances of feuds lasting many generations.
International enmities in Europe have lasted for centuries.
Retaliation provokes counter-retaliation. The .original evil
or damage is vastly multiplied, and absorbs an enormous
amount of time and energy away from useful occupations.

This wider and slower-acting effect of revenge and
resentment is usually overlooked or minimized by the
militarists and glorifiers of war and physical force. But it
holds true whether the struggle is between two individuals,
between one person and a group or between two or more
groups,---whether the groups be small or large. It holds
true in varying degrees whether the original combat ended
with no permanent injury to either side, with some injury,
or with death. It runs through all forms,---the spanking of
a child, a fight, a criminal arrest and imprisonment,
capital punishment, a lynching, a strike or riot, piracy, a
military raid or "punitive expedition", a civil or
international war. Rarely does a peace settlement bring full
satisfaction, forgiveness and solution of the entire
original conflict, so that both parties feel thoroughly
happy and ready to go ahead without suspicion or resentment.
Anger is thus inefficient in both methods and results.

The peaceful resister has to expend much energy, but he
applies it more intelligently than does the violent man. He
selects the really important forces in the environment and
seeks to alter them.[^51] The angry and violent man puts too
much emphasis on immediate objects and too little on the
ultimate impelling forces behind them. If he considers
impelling forces, he does not analyse them sufficiently or
go far enough back. He has to waste much energy because, as
it were he uses too short leverages in attempting to move or
divert opposing objects or forces. The non-violent resister,
by using longer psychological leverages, may have to move
more slowly sometimes, but the work is more efficiently done
and tends to be more permanent.

What the American psychiatrist, W. A. White, says of
conflicting tendencies in the individual may be applied as
well to a conflict between two persons:

"It follows from all this that the symbolization of the
conflict, either in the dream or in the symptoms of the
neurosis or psychosis, will contain elements representative
of both factors, and also that no solution of the conflict
can come about except by the satisfaction of both these
diametrically opposed tendencies. It follows, too, that no
conflict can be solved at the level of the conflict. That
is, two mutually opposed tendencies can never unite their
forces except at a higher level, in an all inclusive
synthesis which lifts the whole situation to a level above
that upon which the conflict rose."...[^52]

Mutual violent struggle is an attempt to solve a contest "at
the level of the conflict The defeat of either party results
in suppression or repression of the energy of the wishes or
will of the defeated party which is certain to result in
waste, friction and trouble sooner or later. The repressed
energy of the thwarted or defeated person, will eventually
find an outlet, a sort of revenge.[^53] But nonviolent
resistance, followed up with moderate wisdom, offers a
solution which gives satisfactory scope for the energies of
both parties. Often it enhances their energies, as a result
of the subsequent good feeling. New associations open up new
channels for pleasurable and fruitful activity. A synthesis
of both energies is similar to what the Freudians call
a"sublimation".

The non-violent resister does not want a passive compliance
from the attacker, such as would be secured by using
successful counter-violence against him. He wants the full
energy of the attacker's active help. Therefore he tries to
make it easy and reasonable for the attacker to join forces
in the new programme. He knows that the pattern of a
peaceful stimulus to the violent one is more harmonious,
more "voluminous", and therefore more potent and efficient
than a violent, i.e.Â intense and painful, stimulus would
be.[^54]

Peace imposed by violence is not psychological peace but a
suppressed conflict. It is unstable for it contains the
seeds of its own destruction. The outer condition is not a
true reflection of the inner condition. But in peace secured
by true non-violent resistance there is no longer any inner
conflict but a new channel found in which both the formerly
conflicting energies are at work in the same direction and
in harmony. Here the outer condition truly reflects the
inner condition. This is perhaps one reason why Gandhi calls
this mode of solving conflict Satyagraha,---holding to
truth. Such a peace is enduring.

If we are to find something which will overcome anger and
fear, it must be in principle the opposite of them and
stronger than they are. Usually we think of courage as the
opposite of fear. But really courage is only a partial
antithesis. Courage implies a readiness to fight, to risk
oneself, to match strength against strength, intelligence
against intelligence. Courage, like anger, implies an
attempt to end the threat of the opposing force or person by
driving it away, making it submissive or destroying it, but
does not usually imply rising above it and utilizing its
energy in a higher synthesis. That is to say, courage
implies willingness to engage in conflict on the same plane
in which the threatening force is found, perhaps because of
an estimation of superior strength or perhaps because of a
consciousness of or faith in a higher security, and this
means trying to suppress the energy of the force opposed.
But love involves not only a willingness to take risks and
face the threatening force, but also a desire and usually an
ability to lift the conflict to a higher plane, and in that
higher plane utilize the energy of the opposing force in a
higher integration or sublimation. Love is stronger than
fear and anger; for one reason, because it is able to
manipulate and guide their energy. It is more intelligent
and far-seeing, as it were. It is also stronger because it
is a more inclusive sentiment than fear or anger or hate, as
has already been explained. Love means using in the moral
sphere the principle of the resolution of forces, known to
every schoolboy who has studied physics, instead of the
wasteful principle of direct opposition and consequent waste
of energy and unsatisfactory and only temporary results.
Love does something better than conquer, for conquest
implies destruction, submission and suppression. Love is
more intelligent and tries not to allow any energy to go to
waste.

In so far as life is made up of a flow of energy, any
principle is sound which increases the flow of energy, and
makes possible the joining and mutual reinforcement of two
or more channels of energy. An increase of life energy gives
power and joy.

So love is a great principle in moral mechanics. It does not
suppress or thwart the energy behind fear and anger but uses
it, and finds ways to steer it into channels desirable to
both parties to the conflict. Fear and anger both involve an
idea of separation, a flight or a driving away or
extinction. Love, on the other hand, involves the idea of
unity and attraction. It is, therefore, the true opposite,
the sound principle by which to eliminate fear, anger,
pride, and all other divisive emotions and attitudes.
"Against the superiority of another there exists no weapon
or remedy save love."[^55] All this makes clear, perhaps,
why it has been said that "Perfect love casteth out fear."

From all this we see that non-violent resistance is
psychologically more efficient than violence.

Problems of conflict cannot, however, always be solved by
firm refusals, kindly spirit, a desire for settlement and
prolonged thinking and discussion. Further action is often
necessary for psychological completeness and in order to
expand and exemplify ideas sufficiently to make a real
settlement. William James pointed out that it is
psychologically unhealthy to feel an emotion or impulse and
not give it fairly prompt expression in action.[^56] And in
certain situations and with certain people action must be
immediate,---action which is constructive of a new order and
thereby resistant to the old order. We tend to believe that
thought clarifies action and should precede action as the
architect's plan precedes the construction of a building,
but often in actual life action precedes thought and
clarifies thought and even creates it. A sudden uprush of
creative energy from the subconscious may discharge
immediately into action without becoming conscious thought
or taking time to find words until later. Action may,
indeed, be considered a mode of thought. Such action by the
true peaceful resister is not an expression of suppressed
anger or indignation, but an immediate creative urge of the
whole personality. In certain situations such action is
tremendously energetic and swift,---a sudden surge of power
that is almost explosive. It may clear the air like a flash
of lightning and prove wonderfully refreshing. It may help
to create new values.

Examples of this sudden and immensely energetic action are
found in the Indian Nationalist movement of 1930. The
wide-spread manufacture of salt in opposition to the
Government salt monopoly, the refusal to pay taxes, the
picketing of liquor and opium shops, the combination of
making homespun cloth and picketing shops selling foreign
cloth are specific instances. These activities were
non-violent. They aimed at replacing a pre-existing order by
a new order. They were intended to put an end, among the
masses, to the pre-existing fear of the Government, and to
stimulate courage, self-reliance, self-respect and political
unity. They actually had that effect in large measure. Other
examples of sudden strong, action which is resistant in one
aspect and creative in another will readily occur to
parents, experienced teachers, and those who have dealt much
with modern reform efforts among delinquent children.

Action of this sort often seems necessary in the case of
young persons, young mass movements and young nations. The
earlier stages of life are primarily motor in character, and
at that period strenuous action must follow promptly after
thoughts and feelings and may often precede thought and
accompany feeling from its beginning. Perhaps certain
pathological conditions of human relationships require
sudden and drastic action to create a better order. There is
evidence indicating that the politico-economic relations
between Britain and India had by 1930 reached a state which
was morally pathological.[^57]

When we come to consider the history and evolution of the
instinct of pugnacity we find further assurance of the
validity of the method of non-violent resistance.

Hocking, in his "Human Nature and Its Remaking" already
cited, has[^58] an exceedingly interesting discussion of
this point which may be summarized as follows:

In its original and crudest form pugnacity requires the
destruction of its object. But with the higher animals and
man, destruction results in a partial defeat of one's total
wish. The conquerer has enough interest in the survival of
his opponent to want to see its chagrin and its
acknowledgment of him as victor. The feeling "I want
destruction" becomes "I want revenge." But revenge likes to
nurse itself and persist, and this tends toward prolonging
the vanquished's life so as to enjoy his discomfiture to the
utmost. And the intensity of hatred in the victims of
ruthless revenge becomes a danger. So revenge develops into
punishment. Punishment tries to inflict pain but without
permanent injury. It discriminates between the evil of will
of the opponent and the will itself, just as revenge
distinguished between the will and the life. Punishment
tried to get rid of "an evil element in the will of another
while retaining the integrity of, and the regard for that
will as a whole." The next step was a sort of therapeutic
improvement, a discovery of a better way to cure an evil or
defective element in an opponent's will. Punishment always
resulted in some degree of bitterness or hatred, which
interfered with the cure of the will. It was discovered that
kindness and friendliness induce a desire in the opponent's
own mind and heart to get rid of the defect or difficulty, a
sort of auto-suggestion which was most efficient. Thus
long-continued experience has brought the shrewdest men to
realize that the earlier and cruder expressions of pugnacity
and anger " are not what the human being, on the whole,
wants." What a person really wants is the richest and
fullest possible expression of his energy, and to attain
that completely there must be an equally rich and full
expression of energy by all other persons. Such is the
evolution of the instinct of pugnacity.

> "The doctrine of pacifism," it has been said, "is a
> perfectly natural development, and ultimately inevitable
> in an animal having an unlimited appetite for experience
> and an indestructible inheritance of social
> instinct."---[^59]

Altruism is

> "a characteristic of the gregarious animal, and a
> perfectly normal and necessary development in him of his
> instinctive inheritance.---The biologist... is aware that
> altruism... is the direct outcome of instinct, and that it
> is a source of strength because it is a source of union."

Apparently certain instincts are of more use to the herd at
an early stage of its development than at a later stage.

Perhaps the East, as expressed by Buddha, Hindu ethics, the
Jainas, Lao Tsu, Christ and Gandhi has studied psychology
and "behaviourism" more profoundly than any modern
Westerners have yet succeeded in doing. The Oriental
terminology may be different from ours but that does not
make the conclusions less wise. The dense population and
prolonged ages of intense social experience of India, China
and other Asiatic civilizations brought about an insight and
realization of the psychological validity of non-violent
resistance. Modern development of swift means of
communication and transportation, the shocks and suffering
of the Great War, and the researches of Western psychology
are perhaps tending to have the same effect as the dense
population and long-sustained experience of the East; thus,
maybe, preparing the Western mind to realize the same truth.

# V. How is Mass Non-Violence Possible?

The wisdom of the East is gradually being approached in the
West by way bf scientific psychology and analysis. Many of
our social problems will reach solution only after we
apprehend more clearly the processes of our own thinking and
emotions. A full understanding of conflict, between groups
as well as between individuals, requires comprehension of
the dynamic aspects of fear and anger, and of their results
in action.

Fear and anger are closely allied. They have the same origin
or purpose,---to separate a person from a living creature,
force or situation considered by the person to be painful,
threatening or dangerous to his comfort, well-being, the
easy action of his instincts, or his very existence. If the
person feels that he is stronger than the threatening force
or situation, the emotion is anger; while if he estimates
the danger as stronger than himself (including his skill),
the emotion is fear.[^60]

> "In anger the removal may be effected by driving it (the
> threatening object) from the environment, destroying its
> consistency, or, if it is a threatening posture in another
> animal the removal may consist of merely changing the
> aggressive posture of the opponent into a submissive one."[^61]

Hate is a sort of deferred or thwarted anger. The hated
person or force is too strong to be removed or destroyed,
and yet not strong enough to cause flight or abject
submission. Therefore the person puts up with it, wishing
all the time, to destroy or harm it but not quite daring to
do so, waiting for an opportunity to weaken or destroy it,
but restraining his anger from blazing forth into open
combat.

It seems from this that fear is always a *fear of losing*
something considered valuable. Always a loss or separation
of some sort is threatened. So a sense of impending or
possible loss is always the basis of both fear and anger.
If that threat is wholly removed, the fear and anger also
disappear.[^62]

The instinct of flight corresponds to or operates along with
the emotion of fear, while the instinct of pugnacity
corresponds to or accompanies the emotion of anger. These
instincts have the same purpose as these emotions,---to
separate oneself from a painful or threatening force or
situation.

This common motive or basis of these pairs of emotions and
instincts provides the explanation of how mass non-violent
resistance is possible and also practical. We know that the
elemental instinct of flight and emotion of fear can be
controlled and disciplined by military training. Ages of war
have taught us that this control and discipline are
practical and effective. Since that is possible, it is
equally possible to control and discipline the parallel and
equally elemental instinct of pugnacity and emotion of
anger.

It may be said that the discipline of emotion and instinct
involved in military war is feasible because courage comes
to its aid. Courage seems to grow out of either a perception
of superior strength, skill, endurance, or security, or the
superiority of the instinct for race preservation over that
of individual self-preservation, as where a mother
sacrifices herself for her offspring.

But it is conceivable that in the case of non-violent
resistance there is another sort of courage, growing out of
a different type of strength, skill, endurance or security;
or perhaps here, too, there may be a factor operating for
the preservation of the race,---a more far-seeing factor, as
it were. The race has had more experience with the
discipline of war than with the discipline of nonviolent
resistance but that does not make the creation and
maintenance of the latter discipline more difficult
intrinsically, once the matter is fully understood. The new
discipline would probably be quantitatively more difficult,
because it involves control of both fear and anger; but not
qualitatively or intrinsically more difficult,
because both these emotions are similar in origin and in
ultimate purpose, namely, race-preservation through
individual self-preservation. And it seems that now the
human race has perhaps developed enough knowledge and
intelligence for a larger number of its leaders to begin to
grasp the possibilities of this novel discipline.[^63]

The possibility of altering the expression of pugnacity and
creating this new discipline will be readily appreciated by
students of psychology by reference to Pavlov's researches
on "conditioned reflexes".[^64] Without attempting here to
explain conditioned reflexes, it may be stated that Pavlov
has again and again, at will, been able to alter a dog's
response to a destructive or painful stimulus from one of
anger or defense to one of assimilation. Or to be specific,
a dog's digestive reflex may be made to stop appearing in
the presence of food, and instead to appear upon feeling
pain from an electric shock or a burn of an acid on the
skin. The reflex may be reconditioned to a new stimulus
which was just the opposite sort from what would be
expected.

J. B. Watson's experiments 6 showing that a newborn baby has
only two fears,---that of falling and of a sudden loud
noise,---suggest that all other and more complex fears are
conditioned reflexes. This would tend to support the idea of
war as being in part a mass-conditioned reflex. To the
extent that it is such, that part of it may be altered and
re-conditioned, just as much as any other. Or if friendly
behaviour or kindness can be considered in part a
conditioned reflex, we may recondition that part of it to
respond to hostile treatment. Of course both war and
non-violent resistance are much more than reflexes or
instinctive actions, for they involve complex sentiments and
conscious discipline. Nevertheless, the instinctive or
reflex elements in war are capable of further alteration and
discipline.

But is not human nature too weak for this new discipline?
Does it not make too heavy a drain on the resources of
idealism, sentiment, emotion and moral
character of ordinary mankind? No, not under proper
training, especially when coupled with understanding. It may
take a few years to establish. It is said to take four years
to make a good private soldier. New habits take time to
become firm. "One lesson of the war is that discipline is
effective in making good soldiers out of the most
unpromising material."[^66] This is as true of the control or
discipline of anger as it is of the discipline of fear. It
is proved by the success in 1928 with the perfectly ordinary
human material among the peasantry of Bardoli district,
whereby as a result of several years of training, they
conducted a wholly successful non-violent struggle against
the Government of the Bombay Presidency (India) for a
revision of the method of assessing land taxes. Those few
thousand simple peasants won their fight on practically all
the items of their original demands. A victory like this
against the cleverest and most experienced ruling class in
the world, is no small test of the efficacy of the method.
More examples were cited in Chapter I.

Napoleon said that the value of discipline is seventy five
per cent of all the elements that go to make success in
battle.[^67] Foch wrote, "Discipline constitutes the main
strength of armies."[^68] The Duke of Wellington said, "Nature
! Habit is ten times nature."[^69] This is just as true of the
non-violent discipline as of the discipline in violence.
Gandhi realized this when he called off the struggle for
Indian political independence in 1922 after the
Chauri-Chaura riots. He was sure that non-violent resistance
was the only way by which India could gain her political
freedom. He tried to teach and train India to use that
weapon. But when many did not understand the new method or
failed in their self-control so that there were riots in
Bombay in November, 1921, and again in Chauri-Chaura in
early 1922, he saw that they were not sufficiently
disciplined. He could no more wage his kind of war with
followers so undisciplined than Napoleon or Foch could win
*their* kind without discipline. Therefore
he declined battle. But that did not mean that the *method*
was a failure, but only that the new discipline was not
sufficiently understood nor the training sufficiently
prolonged. His hostile Indian critics in this matter did not
understand the new method. Some of his formal opponents
understood him better and appraised the power of his weapon
more truly.[^70]

The failure at that time through lack of discipline no more
proves that non-violent resistance is ineffective or futile
or impossible than the many routs and flights in battle
prove that armies and violence are ineffective and absurd.
Nor do the deaths and sufferings of non-violent resisters in
the past prove any more in this respect than the deaths and
wounds of war. This was the first attempt to organize and
discipline a large army of non-violent resisters. Is it
surprising that there was enough indiscipline and
misunderstanding to make it necessary to call a halt,
execute a strategic retreat, and begin to reform the ranks
and train them more intensively and fundamentally?

As a matter of fact there was proportionately more
misunderstanding and lack of discipline among the literate
and "intelligentsia" of India than among the illiterate
peasantry. This is natural, because absorption of Western
ways of thinking was an influence in favour of Western ways.
Mental habit is strong, and so it was not easy for the
intelligentsia to understand this new concept and
discipline. This largely accounts also for the
misunderstanding of Gandhi in the West. Up till now,
pacifists have not sufficiently realized either the
possibilities of joint, corporate action in non-violent
resistance, nor the necessity for discipline, nor the kind
and intensity and many-sided details of that discipline.[^71]
They should learn from their friends the militarists.[^72]

It may be said, "You have named certain instances when
non-violent resistance has been successful, but there have
been countless exceptions, so many that the exceptions are
the rule." I grant the death of Jesus and the Christian
martyrs, the slaughter of innocent thousands
by Genghis Khan and Tamerlane, the tortures of Albigenses,
Negro lynchings and countless other instances. Some of these
people, like many soldiers, won or established their causes
even though they lost their own lives. Neither they nor
their methods were any more "futile" than those of all
soldiers. But perhaps most of them did not show true
non-violent resistance. Maybe they were undisciplined or
frightened or poorly led, and hence were unnecessarily
killed and partly wasted, just as any undisciplined troops
would be in war.

The failures and apparent futilities of non-violent
resistance in the past have been due, very largely, to lack
of discipline, as well as lack of understanding of the full
implications and requirements of the method. Of course there
are sure to be some casualties and losses under it, even at
its best. But provided there is discipline and leadership
which fully understands the psychological mechanisms and the
moral and spiritual elements involved, I am convinced that
the losses will be much less than in violent war. The
calculus of moral probabilities gives this answer, and
historical examples of its intelligent practice prove it, as
we have already seen. Even in the case of individual
encounters, if the method is used with understanding or
faith, and complete sincerity, the chances of failure or
death are less, I believe, than if violence is relied upon.
And of course even where death occurs, the cause for which
the man died may triumph in spite of his death or even
because of it. The validity of the method is to be tested
mainly by whether it can achieve success for its cause, but
also partly by its ability to achieve such success with less
destruction of life, physical injury or destruction of
property than when violence is used. On both these points
non-violent resistance wins, provided the discipline,
understanding and leadership are sound. And all these are as
possible with it as in the case of military methods.

An army can be effective without every soldier in it, or
even a majority of them, being individual paragons of
intelligence and military virtue. Discipline removes most of
the effect of their individual weaknesses and adds momentum
to their virtues. It is the same with a group or army of
disciplined non-violent resisters. If their leaders have the
requisite attitude, understanding and intelligence, the rank
and file may be ordinary human material at the start. The
new training and discipline will improve them enormously, as
it also asserted for military discipline. Presumably, the
smaller the group, the more complete the discipline and
understanding must be. Individuals using non-violent
resistance alone would require more self-control and ability
than is needed for a disciplined group. But even here the
inner attitude and emotional understanding and control are
much more important than any intellectual ability or
experience in the rough-and-tumble world. Indeed, in certain
situations so-called "intellect" and experience count for
almost nothing.

Hence it is not necessary that every single person in a
nation seeking freedom by non-violent resistance must be
fully disciplined to non-violence, any more than every
single citizen in a nation at war must be fully disciplined
for active battle and wholly fearless under attack. Yet it
is just as possible for whole nations to understand the idea
and to be so self-disciplined as to give the "troops"
hearty support and do nothing (as by outbreaks of anger and
violence, riots, etc.) to interfere with their operations,
as it is in the case of whole nations understanding war and
supporting their armies in time of war.

Violence is based upon fear and anger and uses them to the
utmost. We have seen that these two emotions are based on
the idea of separation, of division. Non-violent resistance,
on the other hand, is based upon the idea of unity. The
hypothesis of non-violent resisters is that the strongest
factor in human beings, in the long run, is their unity;---that they have more as a human family in common than as
separate individuals. The basic assumption of these creative
men of peace is that their opponents, no
matter how forbidding externally, or no matter what their
past history, are at bottom decent and have in their hearts
at least a spark of good spirit which can eventually be
aroused and strengthened into action. Non-violent resisters
have sound biological, psychological and historical evidence
for this belief. If it were not true, the human race would
long ago have ceased to exist.

# VI. The Working of Mass Non-Violent Resistance

Assuming that the discipline of non-violence can be and has
been attained how does it actually work in group or mass use?

Since war is the most highly developed and best understood
mode of mass struggle, we will find our explanation first
from authorities on the science and art of war.

Marshal Foch showed clearly by many examples, that the
method of war is primarily psychological, or what he calls "moral".

> "Proofs and instances could be given indefinitely of that
> great importance of morale in war. Von der Goltz himself
> tells us that; 'It is not so much a question of destroying
> the enemy troops as of destroying their courage. Victory is
> yours as soon as you convince your opponent that his cause
> is lost.' And again;  One defeats the enemy not by
> individual and complete annihilation, but by destroying his
> hopes of victory.'"[^73]

Marshal de Saxe remarked: "The secret of victory lies in
the hearts of human beings."[^74] Napoleon stated that, "In
war, the moral is to the physical as three is to one." Von
Caemmerer, speaking of von Clause witz's book on war says,[^75]
"As he pictures war, the struggle between the spiritual and
moral forces on both sides is the centre of all." General
Sir F. Maurice writes that war is "an act in which moral and
psychological factors have a supreme influence."[^76] Captain
B. H. Liddell Hart says that the World War confirms "the
immemorial lesson of history---that the
true aim in war is the mind of the enemy command and
government, not the bodies of their troops, that the balance
between victory and defeat turns on mental impressions and
only indirectly on physical blows."[^77]

The object of non-violent resistance is partly analogous to
this object of war,---namely, to demoralize the opponent, to
break his will, to destroy his confidence, enthusiasm and
hope. In another respect it is dissimilar, for non-violent
resistance demoralizes the opponent only to re-establish in
him a new morale that is finer because it is based on
sounder values. Non-violent resistance does not break the
opponent's will but alters it; does not destroy his
confidence and enthusiasm and hope but transfers them to a
finer purpose. But because we in the West are so thoroughly
familiar with war and military ways of thinking, the fact
that there is a partial analogy between the two methods of
solving conflicts provides a bridge for our thinking. By
following the analogy we Westerners can come to an
understanding of the new method and its effectiveness.

As Hocking points out, "Morale is at the bottom a state of
will or purpose."[^78] It seems to rest largely upon such
factors as the individual soldier's confidence in himself,
in his comrades, in his army, in his leaders, in the methods
used, in the cause for which the war is being waged, in his
government, in the civilians of the nation behind them all.
It also contains such elements as a sense of being merged
into the larger unity of the army, habit, tradition, humour,
and appreciation of risk and a relish for adventure.[^79]

Suppose a group of non-violent resisters were opposed to a
company of soldiers, in a case of a strike, or some
nonviolent Filipinos against the United States soldiers, or
Indians against British soldiers. Suppose also that the
soldiers attempted clubbing tactics or bayonet work. Let us
assume also that the civilians have been non-violent from
the start and there is no shooting by the soldiers.[^80] But
suppose some violence by the soldiers, and arrests of
the civilians. Also that the cause is so strong that as fast
as any are arrested, others come to take their places. What,
presumably, would be the effect on the morale of
the soldiers?

To a certain extent the effect would be the same as that
described in the preceding chapter where an individual
person violently attacks a non-violent resister. But the
discipline and habits of the soldiers would largely prevent
this from happening at first. The individual soldier's will
has become merged with the general will of the army, and
wholly subordinated to that of the commanding officer. He is
used to rough tactics and is not at all squeamish about
inflicting pain and injury on others.

Nevertheless, "One of the chief results of military
training is to increase the suggestibility of the private."[^81] Of course, as Rivers points out, this suggestibility is
chiefly in relation to the officers, but no doubt the
soldiers are also suggestible in relation to the acts and
conduct of their opponents or "enemies" because such acts
and conduct are the whole object toward which the morale of
the soldiers has been built up. This is also indicated by
the remarks of von Clausewitz and von Caemmerer,[^82] "War is
a constant state of reciprocal action, the effects of which
are mutual." "Every action in war is saturated with mental
forces and effects... War is a constant reciprocal effect
of action of both parties." This fact then would presently
tend to offset a little the discipline and hardness of the
soldiers.

The conduct of these civilians would cause surprise in the
individual soldier and thus start him thinking. Frederick
the Great wrote, "If my soldiers began to think, not one
would remain in the ranks." As soon as a soldier begins to
think of certain sorts of things, he begins to be an
individual, to separate himself from the mass mind, the will
and personality of the army. According to one surgeon in the
British army, "The whole army training is designed for this
one purpose of merging the individual into the mass."[^83] If,
then, the soldier is made to think for
himself in the midst of a conflict, it is the opening wedge
for the disintegration of his morale. I do not mean to say
that modern soldiers do no thinking at all, but it will be
conceded that in these days of the printing press a very
large proportion of all people do very little thinking for
themselves. And among soldiers, this is still more true over
a still wider range of affairs.

As the struggle proceeds, suppose the non-violent civilians
maintain their discipline and keep cheerful but also keep
stating their side of the case earnestly and in all
sincerity. Sooner or later the soldiers will talk about it
among themselves. The civilians' total absence of
retaliation or vindictiveness of even looks or tone of voice
contrasts effectively with the harsh or stern commands of
their officers. The situation will tell on the nerves of
both officers and soldiers. This sort of thing is new to
them. They do not know how to treat it. "These civilians
seem wholly inoffensive and harmless and honest. What is
their crime? Why w\~ere we soldiers called out for such a
job? We are for war work, but this is peace." Thus they will
question in their minds and perhaps among themselves. They
will begin to fraternize openly or surreptitiously with the
civilians and prisoners, and learn more about the dispute in
which they are engaged. It will no longer appear to be a
clear-cut case of right vs. wrong, but the opponent's case
will appear to have elements of reason.

If the officers forbid them to fraternize with the
opponents, the soldiers may think that the order is stupid
or that the officers are timid. This would lessen respect
for their officers and lower morale.

If there really is solid truth in the position of the
non-violent resisters, the soldiers will presently begin to
question the validity of their cause. They may become slack
in obeying orders. They will see no good to be gained by
their being there, and no evil or danger to be averted. "When doubt comes, morale crumbles."[^84] The Duke of
Wellington put it even more forcefully;---"No
man with any scruples of conscience is fit to be a soldier."
One of the important elements in a soldier's morale is his
consciousness of being a protector.[^85] If he is deprived of
that, he feels useless and perhaps a little absurd. There is
no exhilaration in using violence against non-violent
resisters. The soldiers may even feel that the authorities
or their officers have morally "let them down" or "sold"
them. In such an event, their morale will go quickly.

Meanwhile the situation is unpleasant for the officers, too.
If they make any serious mistake, they are apt to lose the
respect of the private soldiers as well as of the general
public. If they order any shooting there is almost sure to
be a wave of public indignation. They know how to fight, but
they feel that this situation is "a mess." As Lieut.-Col
Andrews says,[^86] "Officers naturally dread not duty, with
the uncertainties as to how to handle the many delicate
situations." While there is no rioting here, the situation
is felt to be just as delicate nevertheless, perhaps even
more so. Soldiers are trained for action but this encounter
is nearly all quiet. Inaction is notoriously hard on a
soldier's morale.[^87]

But someone may object that non-violent resistance is so
largely defensive, so passive, that it would be fully as
hard on the morale of those using it as on that of the
soldiers opposing them. Not so. The conduct of the
nonviolent resister is not one of mere passive waiting or
endurance. Toward his opponent he is not aggressive
physically, but his mind and emotions are active, wrestling
constantly with the problem of persuading the latter that he
is mistaken, seeking proposals as to a better way out,
examining his own cause and organization to see what may be
its mistakes or short-sightedness, thinking constantly of
all possible ways of winning the truth for both sides. And
among his own group he is ceaselessly active in
strengthening the organization, increasing their unity,
perfecting the discipline, enlightening the understanding,
helping to remove every possible cause of reproach. He is as
busy as any top sergeant of a regiment.

Most private soldiers are bored with monotony and
irresponsibility. The conduct of these civilians will be new
to them and will elicit their interest and attention all the
more because of their previous boredom. It will be a relief
and diversion to have something new to think about.

The courage and persistence of the non-violent resisters
will call forth the admiration of the soldiers and onlookers
or general public. All parties begin to feel that the
authorities have chosen the wrong method. They tend to feel
that this is a matter for a court or arbitration or
discussion. This feeling makes rifts between privates and
officers and the higher command or civilian authorities.

If the situation drags on for weeks or months, the officers
become even more restive. It is undignified to have to
proceed thus against harmless, decent, defenseless people.
They begin to feel themselves in a ludicrous position;---unfairly treated. Neither the officers nor the privates
can feel that they are protecting anyone or any property.[^88]
That consciousness tends to lower self-respect.

Perhaps there has been a campaign to make the nonviolent
resisters seem despicable. They have perhaps been accused of
bodily uncleanliness, dirt, disorder, illiteracy, ignorance,
bad manners, mental and moral degeneracy. They are said to
be "beyond the pale," "barbarous," "beneath contempt,"
etc., etc. We all know that method of bolstering up one's
own pride and self-esteem. It is easy to find faults in a
stranger, or differences that seem like faults; and a
little unconscious Pharisaism helps immensely to increase
one's morale and salve one's conscience. But the soldiers in
immediate contact with the non-violent resisters may find
that in fact they are clean, orderly, well disciplined,
determined, intelligent, "very decent" in behaviour, and
very courageous. It is impossible to be contemptuous of such
men. And when respect begins, the instinct for fair play
asserts itself. And by that time, morale is not very
prominent. That such things can happen even in far more
unlikely circumstances is proved
by the fraternizing between the German and Allied troops on
the first Christmas of the World War. If at the beginning
the non-violent resisters are not very well disciplined, yet
faithful to their ideal, their discipline will grow.

Perhaps one of the officers loses his head, or believes in "making an example" and teaching by terror, and orders the
soldiers to fire on the unarmed non-violent civil resisters,
and many are wounded and killed. The effect is indeed
electrical. The immediate beholders may be terror-stricken
for a short time. But the news inevitably spreads, and the
public indignation against the officer and soldiers will be
overpowering. This was the case with the Jallianwala Bagh
tragedy in India. The hundreds who died there did more by
the manner of their death to lower British self-respect and
British prestige in every country, and to further the cause
of Indian apolitical freedom than could the deaths of thrice
that number in violent rioting or attack upon the army.
There have undoubtedly been similar cases of violence by
American troops, French troops, troops of any and every
nation which likes to consider itself a "trustee" for
other nations, tribes or races. A similar instance occurred
in the United States in the winter of 1929, when
Pennsylvania coal company police killed a miner on strike.
Such deeds are not peculiar to any nation but only to a
particular purpose and set of beliefs. The point to be
emphasized, however, is that nonviolent resistance, even in
the extreme case where its users are killed, has a far
higher probability of weakening the morale of the violent
opponents and of promoting the aim sought for than violent
resistance would have.

If the Government uses police instead of soldiers, this
process of morale destruction will operate somewhat
differently. Police are usually drafted from the same
district where they work, and so are not apt to be so
prejudiced. They are more apt to be married men and so,
through their wives, are more open to public opinion. If
many new police are drafted their discipline will be weak
and they
will be apt to indulge in excesses which will rouse public
opinion against the Government as well as themselves.

As we are trying to be realists, let us also see what might
happen where the soldiers use poison gas, either of a
disabling or lethal kind, or bomb attacks by airplanes. This
might not be a frequent occurrence, as the previous
non-violence would not be apt to incite such an act from the
soldiers. But it has happened. In such an event there would
temporarily cease to be direct effective contact between the
soldiers and the non-violent resisters. Therefore, the
morale of the soldiers would probably not be weakened. But
such an attack would add so many sympathizers to the ranks
of the non-resisters from among their own people, that a
very complete and effective trade boycott and strike of
domestic or industrial work could be organized. 17 The
economic pressure of such boycotts needs no very direct
contact to be effective. Indeed it is evidence of economic
and social separation. It is felt tens of thousands of miles
away, in the most distant countries, and causes far greater
losses to such violent people than any temporary advantage
from their terrorism. It lowers their prestige everywhere,
and makes such tactics less probable in the future. And the
reduction in number of such events gives the non-violent
resisters other opportunities to weaken their opponents'
morale.

The well-known British military authority, Captain B. H.
Liddell-Hart states that,

"In reality it is more fruitful, from the military point of
view, to wound than to kill. While the dead man lies still,
counting only one man less, the wounded man is a progressive
drain upon his side. Comrades are often called upon to
bandage him, sometimes even to accompany him to the rear;
stretcher-bearers and ambulance drivers to carry him back.
Doctors and orderlies must tend him in hospital. And on his
passage thither, the sight of him tends to spread depression
among the beholders, acting on morale like the drops of cold
water which imperceptibly wear away the stone."[^90]

But this is not true where the wounded are nonviolent
resisters. The non-violent resister shows a greater
unselfishness, a loftier courage, and a deeper conviction
than the violent soldier. Therefore the sight of the
nonviolent wounded creates a purer, wider, more active and
more enduring sympathy and unity with their cause than does
the sight of wounded soldiers. In non-violent resistance the
suffering is itself a weapon or means of winning. Hence,
such casualties do not decrease the morale of the
non-violent resisters. Similarly, when non-violent resisters
are imprisoned they are not thereby "put out of commission" or rendered useless to their cause. Instead, their
endurance of hardship increases the general sense of human
unity and sympathy for their cause.

Inasmuch as the government of those soldiers in question is
seeking to impose its will upon the non-violent resisters,
there will necessarily be parleys sooner or later between
the non-violent resisters' leaders and the officers of that
army or emissaries from that government. Such parleys mean
contact, and contact means an opportunity further to convert
the opponents, or, in military parlance, to alter their
morale.[^91] Whenever the violent opponents ask to negotiate,
the leaders of the non-violent party will enter into
negotiations even though it may seem that by refusing to do
so and going on with the struggle the violent opponents may
be compelled to yield, and even though the request may be or
seem to be a stratagem on the part of the opponents to gain
time or to break up the unity of the non-violent party. This
willingness to negotiate proves to the violent opponent and
to the world that the non-violent resisters are not seeking
to humiliate their opponents, and thus paves the way for the
conversion of the opponents apd for the only kind of a
victory worth having. An example of this was Gandhi's
negotiations with Viceroy Lord Irwin during the Indian
struggle of 1930-31.

It should be remembered that ruthless deeds tend to become
known to the world at large and then to lessen the
respect of other nations for the nation indulging in them. A
decrease of prestige is not relished by any nation nowadays.
The government in question, besides receiving foreign
censure, will be severely criticised by its own more decent
citizens. They may create very considerable pressure of
public opinion against the government and compel it to alter
its tactics. It is true that distant civilians who have been
blinded by their own pride and long continued propaganda are
very often harder to touch than the hostile soldiers on the
spot. The arm-chair warriors at home during the World War
were unbelievably cruel and hard, and worse in America than
in England or France because they were farther away and felt
realities less. Yet once their morale gets a little
undermined, they crumble rapidly, for they have not been
subjected to the discipline of soldiers.

The experienced person will say that such events are always
hidden by the censorship of such a government. Sometimes
this is so. Acts of the American marines in Haiti and
Nicaragua were hidden that way for months. The news of
Jallianwala Bagh at Amritsar in India did not reach the
United States for eight months after the event. But the
tendency is for such news to leak out sooner or later.
People of all nationalities go to all parts of the world
nowadays. Travel and trade are ubiquitous. Newspaper
reporters are always keen for scenting a "story," and as
soon as they learn of a censorship anywhere they are still
more eager. The modern press services have long stimulated
people's curiosity. And if curiosity finds itself balked or
thwarted, it will never rest till the story is known. And
Western nations are all so jealous of one another that each
is eager to learn and publish something discreditable to the
others. (I am not trying to criticise, but merely to state
facts,---weaknesses among those who are addicted to
violence, against which the stronger forces of non-violence
will effectively operate.) Any considerable struggle in
which one side rigidly sticks to non-violent resistance with
any degree of success
makes wonderful news. It is so unusual and dramatic.
Newspaper reporters and correspondents have a sense of "news value," and can be trusted to try hard to evade
government censorship. The mere knowledge that censorship
has been employed arouses doubt in neutral minds of the
violent assailant's case. If, in the area where the struggle
goes on, the opposing government does not permit the
newspapers to publish adequate news of the struggle, the
people cease to believe the official statements, and give
credence instead to oral rumour or information passed about
among themselves.

Of course powerful ruling groups and countries rely chiefly
on pride, disdain and disgust to censor the news. They or
their supporters vilify these protesting groups or nations,
and the general repugnance thereby created acts
as a screen against the truth.

> "Repugnance, Disgust and Contempt tend to arrest and detain
> attention on the things which excite them only so long as
> may be necessary to avoid them. Repugnance, Disgust and
> Contempt tend to exclude wonder in relation to their objects... Disgust tends to exclude curiosity about its object arid
> all further knowledge of it... Disgust tends to repress
> pity and all disinterested sorrow on behalf of its object."[^92]

Many a trade unionist knows the truth of this out of his
own hard experience. So also do the Negroes, Chinese and
Indians, poor immigrants in the United States, and many
others. Intelligent people all over the world should be very
much on their guard when they see any disdainful or
vilifying newspaper stories, articles or books about any
group or nation other than their own, or any statements
making subtle invidious comparisons between other people and
themselves. Beware of self-flattery! Whether or not such
articles or books or accounts were written or told
intentionally or innocently, the result is to hide the more
important facts and truths in the situation. I do not mean
that one should not see all aspects of every situation fully
and clearly, but one should merely bear in mind that adverse
criticism is dangerous to the person who uses it or absorbs
it.

But any oppressed groups anywhere may also be sure that
sincere prolonged non-violent resistance on their own part
will surely break down barriers and rouse enough curiosity,
respect and wonder, to reveal at least a part of the truth
and thus effect a more satisfactory adjustment of the
conflict.

In non-violent resistance as practised by Gandhi there is
another element which serves to weaken censorship. That is
his rigid adherence to truth. He has never tolerated secrecy
of any sort. He has invited the police to meetings and
answered all their questions fully. He has always notified
the authorities amply in advance of any action he planned to
take which might affect them, and has been frank as to his
beliefs and position.[^92a] Examples of this may be found in
his campaign in Champaran, his long letter to Viceroy Lord
Irwin in March, 1930, and his telegrams to Viceroy Lord
Willingdon in December, 1931 and January, 1932. Such a
policy gives the public full advance notice of what is
likely to take place, and thus makes a subsequent censorship
much more difficult to maintain.[^92b] Clean fighting such
as this retains every moral advantage of the noblest
chivalry.[^93] Secrecy would indicate or seem to indicate fear
as well as untruth, or suggest them with the effect of
auto-suggestion, and thus would spoil the morale of the
resisters and deprive the method of its power.[^93a]

But the non-violent resisters must realize that they
cannot decrease the prestige of their opponents or create
dissension among their opponents' supporters until they
break through the censorship of governments, press
associations, or popular disdain; that they cannot break
through these censorships until they have conducted
themselves with high excellence, discipline, unity,
coherence, cleanness and courage so as to compel respect,
admiration and wonder. Therefore their chief efforts should
be not in talking to reporters or appealing for help from
outsiders, but with themselves, to increase their own
discipline and organization, their courage and courtesy
and intelligence and cleanness and order. They should strive
for such details even as clean bodies, clean clothes, clean
houses, clean streets, clean talk. These create self-respect
and respect from others. Military discipline is thorough and
detailed like this. Non-violent discipline must be the same.
Such resisters must realize that if ever they fail in their
discipline and fall into violence, untruth, secrecy or
disorder, they set back their cause and delay their victory;
and if they do not recover their discipline, they will
suffer complete defeat. For these reasons there is need for
the utmost energy and determination and persistence and
will-power on the part of non-violent resisters, whether
'they be national groups or labour unions or what not. This
discipline, chiefly directed toward themselves, will not
arouse outside opposition. They will compel respect when
they deserve it and not before. And when they can compel
respect they are on the road to upsetting their opponents'
morale.

One more policy of ruthlessness must be considered, namely
that of starvation. This was used against the Germans with
fearful effect in the World War. But it is a weapon that
cuts both ways. It not only weakened the Germans greatly
during the war but so interfered with their recuperative
ability after the "peace" that it reduced the prosperity
of the whole world. The Allied bankers and merchants are
still suffering from the loss of German purchasing power.
Even the militarists are beginning to realize this.[^94] The
great naval nations will hesitate before they try that
weapon against a whole nation.

Against smaller groups a government might attempt
starvation, but if such groups are really in earnest, have a
good cause, and maintain good discipline, their resistance
will surely affect public opinion and lower the morale of
their opponents. Compare, for instance, the effect of
MacSwinney's hunger strike in prison during the Irish,
struggle for freedom.

Any persons who feel aggrieved by the policies of the ruling
groups of either the British Empire or the United States may
count on help from the strong desire of the peoples of those
countries always to justify their conduct morally, to give
it at least a moral tone or appearance.[^95] When the Germans
invaded Belgium in 1914, Britain and the Allies used this
violation of treaty to stiffen their own morale and secure
help from neutrals. It enabled them to play the part of
chivalrous defenders of the weak.[^96] It served to cover up
many mistakes, faults and evils of the Allies, and kept them
all feeling splendidly self-righteous for several years, at
least till the secret treaties leaked out. The political
effect of this attitude of mind is a desire for and reliance
upon prestige,---a superiority-complex which is designed to
create an inferiority-complex among other nations or races,
and thus make easier the task of dominating.

The maintenance of this prestige requires respect or awe or
fear from others. Now if any of these Anglo-Saxon
governments or ruling groups engage in harsh violence
against a group of truly non-violent resisters, the news
.surely leaks out sooner or later and lessens the prestige
of that ruling group in the eyes of the rest of the world.
Also in the eyes of the more honest and intelligent persons
in the nation in question. The highly moral attitude and
tone of the professions of that government begin to look
thin and ludicrous. Dignity and prestige are shaken. There
is a weakening of the morale of that governing group. Public
opinion today all over the world condemns ruthless violence
and cruelty as such, once the cloak of disgust, disdain or
fear propaganda has been removed. We are no longer living in
the days of Genghis Khan or Attila or Nebuchadnezzar. The
way in which the world responded to the German attack on
Belgium proves this, wholly aside from any question as to
the Allies' sincerity in playing on the appeal. Thus the
need of those who rely on prestige, for respect from the
rest of the world, becomes a weak spot in their armour, the
minute they do
an act which does not deserve or actually win respect. The
non-violent resisters' weapon of love of truth is directed
immediately at this weak spot and pushed home with all
courage and fortitude.

We can now see that non-violent resistance "reduces the
utility of armaments as instruments of policy," to use de
Madariaga's phrase.[^97] It does so partly in direct and
positive manner, proposing and aiding in the creation of new
terms of settlement, new roads out of conflict. It also does
so by disintegrating the morale of the opponents,---the
morale of troops, of commanders, of civil authorities and of
their home civilian populations. It acts like the
negotiations at Brest-Litovsk to raise opposition ac home to
the policy of the opposing government. The break-down of the
violent opponent's morale is really a change of heart. He
does not merely become discouraged about fighting or about
his power. He ceases to want in the same way the things he
wanted before; ceases to maintain his former attitude toward
the resisters; he undergoes a sort of inner conversion. In
the case of a very proud and obstinate opponent there might
have to be a complete outward defeat before the change of
heart really takes place, but such a change is sure to come.
In case of industrial strikes, non-violent resistance would
tend to raise doubts in the minds of the stockholders of the
corporation involved. It tends to lower the prestige of any
controlling power or group who are not acting as absolutely
sensitive and true servants of the people within their
governance.

A military writer states that,

> "The principle of demoralization has for its object the
> destruction of this morale: first, in the moral attack
> against the spirit and nerves of the enemy's nation and
> government; secondly, against this nation's policy ;
> thirdly, against the plan of its commander-in-chief; and
> fourthly, against the morale of the soldiers commanded by
> him. Hitherto, the fourth, the least important of these
> objectives, has been considered by the traditionally-minded
> soldier as the sole psychological objective of this great
> principle. In the last great war the result of this was---that the attack on the remaining three only slowly evolved
> during days of stress and because of a faulty appreciation
> of this principle during peace time."[^98]

Non-violent resistance operates to lower all these different
kinds of morale, and it may be effectively aided by economic
boycotts or in some extreme instances perhaps by non-payment
of taxes.

We see, therefore, that non-violent resistance is not wholly
unlike the principles of military demoralization. It is
merely a step further in the logic, and in military history.

Besides decreasing the opponent's morale, mass nonviolent
resistance does much to enhance the morale and unity of
those who use it. We have noted the unifying effect of the
sight of voluntary suffering. This operates not only upon
the resisters themselves but also, by sympathy, upon all
beholders who hitherto may have been neutral. This happened
in India in 1930 and is now happening there again. The
sincerity and earnestness of the sufferers, if the suffering
continues long, convinces many others and wins them over to
support the cause. The sight of leaders themselves enduring
hardships, insults and wounds, going to jail, sacrificing
their fortunes and lives for their cause is far more potent
to produce increase of numbers, unity, enthusiasm, devotion
and increase of effort than the sight, in violent war, of
generals and politicians dwelling in comfort and safety and
telling others what to do and how to fight. "The blood of
the martyrs was the seed of the Church," and the same result
comes in any situation where non-violent methods are
steadily used.

In situations where there is such rigid government
censorship that little news of the oppression and violence
of soldiers and police against the non-violent resisters
gets to the outside world, this unifying effect and winning
of sympathy from neutral or timid onlookers is very
important. The example of steady, long-continued nonviolent
resistance creates within the censored area a public
opinion that compels aid from all sorts of men who ma y have
been entirely and strongly opposed to the resisters.
Intellectual reasons for not joining the group crumble away,
sometimes slowly, sometimes quickly. The feelings engendered
by the prolonged sight of non-violent suffering for a cause
ends differences of mind and also of feeling.

If it is a national struggle or among a large number of
people containing many diverse elements separated by old
social fissures or badly disturbed by the recent impact of a
different culture, it may take many months for the unifying
effect of non-violent resistance and its search for social
truth to go far enough to bring success. Nevertheless,
the process is sure and, if the method is faithfully adhered
to, the result certain.

It may be that while the resisters are in jail, some of the
conservative, selfish or comfort-loving members of their
general group engage in "politics" and palaver with the
opponents. As that sort of thing goes on, perhaps for
months, the contrast between them and those who are
suffering jail terms and hardships grows so glaring that
more and more people turn away in disgust and mistrust from
the politicians and pin their faith on those who are in
jail. The politicians sense this loss of their prestige and
are in turn compelled to follow the crowd and cease
cooperating with the opponents.

This unifying power of non-violent resistance may often take
effect more rapidly than does the breaking down of the
morale of the opponents. It is also a factor in that loss of
morale. As time goes on, the access of numbers and strength
and unity in the group of nonviolent resisters begins to
impress the violent opponents, to fill them with misgivings,
and thus to injure their morale still further. Strength
compels respect, and in this case the respect is for moral
qualities as well as for numbers or political power.

War also acts to unify nations engaged in it. But the unity
engendered by non-violent resistance is deeper, more
closely knit and more permanent than that produced by war,
for reasons already discussed.

If, as often happens,[^99] the group or nation which is using
non-violent resistance has been under political, economic or
social subjection for many years and has therefore lost much
self-confidence, self-reliance and self-respect, and suffers
from what the psychologists call an "inferiority complex,"
this new method of struggle tends to put an end to that
weakness. The contrast between the brutal deeds of the
exasperated violent party and the nonviolent sufferings of
the resisters is so startling as to produce in the ranks of
the resisters a feeling of immense moral superiority.
Presently the rage of the violent party leads them to make
false statements or commit various stupidities which make
the resisters realize that their superiority is intellectual
as well as moral. This intellectual contrast grows still
more marked if the resisters adhere faithfully to truth in
all their words as well as actions. If the stimulus of these
contrasts is continued long enough, the inferiority-complex
of the resisters' group vanishes and their self-respect,
self-confidence and self-reliance steadily increase. Thus
another element of their former disadvantage is done away
with. Students of psychology have now learned what the
guiding minds of the ruling classes have known for
centuries,---that an inferiority complex firmly created in
childhood and judiciously maintained by regular stimulus
through the period of development, is the most potent of all
methods to restrain independent creative action among
individuals and masses of people. It makes them feel utterly
helpless and deprives them of hope, imagination or will even
to try to struggle, and in times of crisis it creates a
fatal hesitation and lack of confidence. Hence this creative
power of non-violent resistance, putting an end to
inferiority complexes, makes it a very important weapon for
oppressed nations, classes and groups everywhere.

Another reason why mass non-violent resistance is effective
is because in course of time it wins for its users
the support of public opinion just as in the case of its
individual use. It is well known that the gaining of public
opinion is one of the principal objects of war.[^100] That was
the object of all the propaganda in the World War. The
immensely greater part that propaganda played then in
comparison with previous wars shows the increasing
importance of public opinion in large conflicts.[^101]

Victories in war are imposing and terrifying, but the
alliances and co-operations gained thereby are notoriously
unstable. Such allies come more because it seems expedient
than because they really want to. A victory by nonviolent
resistance does not carry with it a further latent threat to
harm anyone. It carries conviction of sincerity and
friendship, whereas a victory through violence always has in
it at least a suspicion of selfishness and possible further
aggrandizement. In quality a victory by nonviolent
resistance is far more gallant and joyous than one by
violence can ever be. It requires no lying or distortion or
suppression of the truth, no slaughter or threats. It leaves
no bad conscience or bad taste in the mouth. The public
opinion it gains is weighty and lasting.

Still another way in which mass non-violent resistance
operates is to end and clear away social defects, economic
mistakes and political errors. The semi-military discipline
of the resisters, the getting rid of bad habits, the
learning to struggle without anger, the social unity
developed, the emphasis on moral factors, the appeal to the
finest spirit of the opponents and onlookers, the generosity
and kindness required,---all these constitute a social
purification, a creation of truer values and actions among
all concerned. If the struggle involves many people and
lasts a long time, the discussion of the issues becomes so
widespread and intense and detailed that much that was
previously hidden or misunderstood is revealed and made
clear to all. It is a period of great public education. The
nature of the struggle and its prolongation bring into
unmistakable action the real purpose of the two parties,
and show a great many of the implications of their
respective aims and attitudes not previously seen or
understood. The struggle tests the sincerity of both
parties. It corrects errors among the violent party, too.
This evolution of more social truth is a gain to both sides.
Like war, non-violent resistance is a method of deciding
great public questions, and this clearing away of errors is
an essential part of the settlement of such great disputes.
"The truth shall make you free" is no mere sentiment. When
truth is more nearly approximated in action there is a
tremendous gain in strength as well as a liberation.
Although a long war also clears away some social, economic
and political errors, it is not very effective for this
purpose because the angers and hatreds of war tend strongly
to becloud the truth, as was clearly shown by the propaganda
of the World War.

Possibly to some readers this whole chapter may seem to be a
structure of untried theory. Who in this actual world of
hard realities does or ever would for an instant fear this
so-called weapon of non-violent resistance?

The answer is known to every student of history, every
detective, secret-service man or C.I.D. officer, every
really "hard-boiled" ruthless executive of an American
industrial corporation which has had a strike of employees,
every American trade union leader, every leader of a subject
people striving for political freedom. The answer is that
every "blood and iron" type of governor fears nonviolent
resistance so much that he secretly hires so-called "agents
provocateurs" who go among the non-violent resisters
pretending to be of them, and invite them to deeds of
violence or actually throw bombs or do deeds of violence
themselves.[^102] This Was the method of the old Russian
government under Tsardom. The rulers in power immediately
make great outcry, stir up public indignation against the "miscreants", call out the police or soldiery, and "repress
the uprising" with considerable brutality, meanwhile
assuring the world that these are stern but necessary steps
taken only in the interests of public safety,
law and order. Those striving for freedom or more privileges
are indeed often violent in the first instance. But if they
are not violent, their opponents or the underlings of their
opponents frequently stir up violence in order to take
advantage of the public reaction against it. That they feel
they need to adopt such tactics shows how much they fear
non-violent resistance.

Non-violent resisters must face this fact without anger or
bitterness. It is simply one item in the whole situation
with which they have to contend. Their defense is to build
up a thorough discipline of non-violence in feeling,
thought, word, and deed amongst every one of their members.
They must see the whole meaning of what they are trying to
do. They are trying to discipline and control the emotion of
anger and the instinct of pugnacity in the same way and to
the same extent that military discipline controls the
emotion of fear and the instinct of flight. Therefore under
this new discipline, violent words and actions directed
against the opponent or his interests are to be made as
traitorous to the cause as running away is in the army.
Anger is to become as disgraceful and socially reprehensible
as cowardice is now among schoolboys or soldiers.

Once that understanding and attitude and discipline are
attained among the group of non-violent resisters, any agent
provocateur who comes whispering among them or preaching
violence, retaliation or revenge will be immediately known
for what he is, and repudiated. And the group will soon
prove its tactics so clearly to the public that the latter
will not be deceived by the act of an agent provocateur bomb
thrower or inflammatory speaker.

"But," says the shrewd critic, "even if we grant the
efficiency of this new weapon provided it could once get
under way; would it not quickly be rendered impossible
merely by imprisonment or deportation for life of the few
leaders who understand it and see its possibilities?" The
answer again is, No.Â The idea has already gone too far. New
leaders would spring up as fast as you arrest the old
ones. Further, nowadays you cannot go on indefinitely
arresting large numbers of quiet, steady, industrious,
gentle people for nothing. Non-violence is decency to the
nth power. Governments, after all, have to make some
appearance of existing for the welfare of their peoples.
Wholesale arrests for the practice of virtue cannot continue
very long. The example of those few leaders is so striking
that their execution or life imprisonment would be dangerous
to governments and government prestige.

It may be urged that non-violent resistance would fail if
attempted against armies of certain nations with a
reputation of ruthlessness and callous brutality.
Undoubtedly in such a case there would be losses, and
perhaps heavy ones. The history of Cromwell's conquest of
Ireland, and the record of the laws and punishments of those
days show clearly that the English in that century were
fearfully brutal and callous, yet the non-violent resistance
of the Quakers prevailed against them. But even barbarians
respect courage, and are perhaps more easily subject to
wonder and awe in the face of extraordinary events than are
the more sophisticated or more highly organized nations.[^103]
Non-violent resistance touches human nature itself, not
merely its cultured areas. The psychological forces in
non-violent resistance would operate in different ways
against different nations, but they will operate effectively
against them all, as surely as violent war has operated
against them all.

CHAPTER VII

AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE FOR WAR

Despite the horrors, futilities and destructiveness of war
there are nevertheless certain virtues and truths associated
with it which humanity cannot afford to lose. In any
discussion of new methods of settling conflicts, these
military virtues cannot be disregarded.

The romance of war is an undoubted fact, especially for
those who have never taken part in modern war. There is in
all hearts a desire to live a significant life, to serve a
great idea and sacrifice oneself for a noble cause, to feel
the thrill of spiritual unity with one's fellows and to act
in accordance therewith. We all wish for strenuous action
and the exercise of courage and fortitude, to be carried
away by the enthusiasm of daring. We all love to undergo a
common discipline and hardship for the sake of a fine ideal
; to be in good effective order; to be strong, generous and
self-reliant; to be physically fit,---with body, mind and
soul harmoniously working together for a great
purpose,---thus becoming a channel of immense energies.
Under such conditions the whole personality would be alert,
conscious, unified, and living profoundly, richly and
exaltedly. Then one could be truly and gloriously happy.
Martial music suggests many of these elements and their
consequent exhilaration and exaltation.

Probably war and conflict seem to promise such results
partly because our ordinary life of alleged peace is so
often dull, trivial, monotonous and devoid of fine purpose.
It is so full of frustration, balked disposition, hidden
violence, oppression and meanness; so insipid, empty,
fragmentary, full of cross-purposes and evil.

" Such Â«a hopeless snarl. Anything to be relieved of such a
mess." So cries the heart. Yet what a risk, to wrench'
ourselves from established life.

80

AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE FOR WAR 81

One reason why we take such deep delight in risk attending
the search for this release is that such adventures turn
possibilities into accomplished facts. They are modes of
creation, of " free activity of the soul ", as von
Clausewitz says. Hence, after men have long been chained to
an industrial routine, feeling themselves helpless cogs in a
vast machine, the call of an immeasurable risk Cannot easily
be resisted. But violence and war are attractive not merely
for their romance; they also have solid elements of truth
and virtue.

The most outstanding virtue of violence is that of courage.
But violence is not the only occasion or test or proof of
courage.

Another virtue is energy. All the deep emotions, especially
fear and anger, are generators of tremendous energy. To be a
channel of immense energy gives one a thrill and a
satisfaction that can never be forgotten. Fear, anger and
hatred are doubtless evil, but the energy that they arouse
is, by itself, good; for as William Blake said, energy is
divine.

Furthermore, the sincerity of fighters and warriors is
admirable. They live and work, sacrifice and die for their
vision of the truth, even though they may be too
inarticulate to express it in words. The militarist's vision
of truth may be partial and cloudy, but nevertheless he
lives, suffers and dies for the truth as he sees it. He may
even be inspired by hatred, anger, and revenge, and may put
his whole faith in material weapons, but he is true to
himself and the faith that is in him. That much is fine and
solid.

Another virtue of the militarists which deserves our
admiration is discipline. Discipline establishes and
maintains effective habits, creates solidarity and
reliability, promotes self-respect and respect from others .
1

The militarist is right when he says that conflict is an
inevitable part of life. This world is inherently diverse
and changing; and since human beings differ so much in

P-6

82 THE power of non-violence

the values they hold, in environment, inheritance,
intelligence, tolerance, and unselfishness, and are so bound
by tradition and habit, the adjustments involved in change
and growth necessarily result in conflicts. No strong or
sensible person would want to abolish growth or change or
the positive achievements that often issue from struggle.
Struggle is a part of the very meaning of life.

These, then, seem to be the important virtues of the violent
fighter,---enterprise, courage, strenuous action, and
endurance; sincerity, devotion, and a sense of unity with
one's own kind; order, training and discipline. His truth
that conflict is inevitable is another element of his
strength.

Our examination of the processes of non-violent resistance
enables us now to realize that all these virtues and truths
of war are given full scope and exercise in this new method
of settling great disputes. If any nation or group adopts
mass non-violent resistance, there will be no moral losses
resulting.

Mr.Â Walter Lippmann, in an excellent article on " The
Political Equivalent of War," 2 quotes . from William James'
essay on " A Moral Equivalent for War," and continues :

" It is not sufficient to propose an equivalent for the
military virtues. It is even more important to work out an
equivalent for the military methods and objectives. For the
institution of war is not merely an expression of the
military spirit. It is not a mere release of certain
subjective impulses clamouring for expression. It is
also---and, I think, primarily---one of the ways by which
great human decisions are made. If that is true, then the
abolition of war depends primarily upon inventing and
organizing other ways of deciding those issues which
hitherto have been decided by war

" Any real programme of peace must rest on the premise that
there will be causes of dispute as long as we can foresee,
and that those disputes have to be decided, and that a way
of deciding them must be found which is not war."

" A way of deciding them which is not war." Is that way
non-violent resistance? Closer examination shows that it
satisfies Mr.Â Lippmann's requirements. Non-violent

AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE FOR WAR 83

resistance not only utilizes the military virtues, it uses
also on a moral plane many of the military methods and
principles, it employs many of the same psychological
processes, and even retains some of the military objectives,
with moral modifications. Military men know much about human
nature, but non-violent resisters know still more. If war
has been in the past a practicalmethod of making great human
decisions, of settling great disputes, this new method will
be still more effective for such a purpose.

The very principles of military strategy operate in this new
mode of struggle.

Von Clausewitz's principles of war have been summarized, 3
as follows :

"Retaining the initiative, using the defensive as the
decisive form of action, concentration of force at the
decisive point, the determination of that point, the
superiority of the moral factdh to purely material
resources, the proper relation between attack and defense,
and the will to victory."

Other authorities state them somewhat differently; Foch, for
instance, laying more stress on the offensive. 4

We have seen that the non-violent resister begins an
entirely new line of conduct. He seizes and maintains the
moral initiative. He uses the principle of surprise most
effectively. 5 Von Clausewitz said; " Surprise plays a much
greater part in strategy than in tactics; it is the most
powerful element of victory," and a long line of military
authorities agree. 6

The surprise of non-violent resistance is effective partly
because it is startling and partly because the opponent is
so bound by his violent habits that he is illprepared to
utilize the new tactics himself. He is like a wrestler using
European methods pitted against a Japanese using jiujitsu.
The surprise of non-violent resistance, unlike that of war,
is not due to deceit or stratagem but simply to its novelty
and daring.

Napoleon stated, 7

" It is an approved maxim in war, never to do what the enemy
wishes you to do, for this reason alone, that he desires it.
A field of battle, therefore, which he has previously
studied

84

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

and reconnoitred, should be avoided, and double care should
be taken where he has had time to fortify and entrench. One
consequence deducible from this principle is, never to
attack a position in front which you can gain by turning."

Non-violent resistance acts fully in accord with Napoleon's
principle. Your violent opponent wants you to fight in the
way to .which he is accustomed. If you utterly decline, and
adopt a method wholly new to him, you have thereby gained an
immediate tactical advantage.

In " using the defensive as the decisive form of action,"
the peaceful resister in his external actions agrees with
von Clause witz, but in respect to his psychological
energies he agrees with Foch; he is constantly " attacking,"
that is, energetically seeking the psychological road for a
truly satisfactory solution of the conflict. His energy fc
not used so much in opposition as in trying to open new and
adequate and wise channels for the energies of both his
opponents and himself to unite in and flow on together, and
in removing defects from his own position. Nonviolent
resistance is not directed against the energy of the
opponent's desires but merely against their immediate
direction, form or method. It seeks to discover for him a
new and wiser channel for his energy.

Yet this does not mean reducing the conflict to a tame
debating society. Although sometimes a safe and easy issue
of the conflict may be found, the non-violent resister may
feel assured of a fair probability that he will sooner or
later have to suffer hardships, and perhaps wounds,
imprisonment and even death. If the struggle is against a
powerful group or corporation or a government, and is
prolonged, the resisters may have to suffer horrible
tortures and bestial treatment. " War is hell," and in a big
long struggle soldiers and police abandon all restraints. We
assume that the peaceful resister is really in earnest,
really believes in his cause, is ready to sacrifice for it,
and is no more a coward than any soldier is. He must take
risks. This is a real adventure,---no parlour make-believe
for pretenders or boasters.

AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE FOR WAR 85

But non-violent resistance differs in one psychological
respect from war. The object is not to make the opponent
believe that he is crushed and beaten and humiliated, but to
persuade him to realize that he can attain security, or
whatever else his ultimate desire may be by easier and surer
means than he saw formerly. The effort is furthermore to
help him work out such new means, not rigidly or on any a
priori plan, but flexibly in accordance with the deepest
growing truth of the entire situation in all its bearings.
The opponent's courage is not destroyed, but merely his
belief that his will and desire must be satisfied only in
his way is altered, and he is led to see the situation in a
broader, more fundamental and far-sighted way, so as to work
out a solution which will satisfy or more nearly satisfy
both parties.

Does the non-violent resister " concentrate his force at the
decisive point," and is he active in " the determination of
that point ?" He certainly is. He decides, with Marshal de
Saxe, that " The secret of victory lies in the hearts of
human beings," 8 that is, that it is a matter of psychology.
Therefore he concentrates upon the psychological forces in
the situation, and deals with them as efficiently and
powerfully as he possibly can. And in so far as
concentration means bringing strength to bear against
weakness, he does that also, for in this moral or
psychological field he is far stronger and better prepared
than his opponents

We need not dilate further upon the belief and action of the
non-violent resister, in respect to the principle of the "
superiority of the moral factor to purely material
resources." He acts more sincerely upon that principle than
did any soldier ever yet born.

" The proper relation between attack and defense " has been
very searchingly considered by the peaceful resister . 9 He
knows that the best relation of all between these two
energies is not one of opposition but of resolution,
integration and sublimation. He thus enables both sides to
win, and conquers both his own possible short 86

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

sightedness of aim and that of his enemy at the same time.
The result is not a triumphant victor on the one side and a
despondent, repressed vanquished on the other. Both sides
are happy in the joint victory of their more important
selves and the common defeat of their mistakes.

Does the peaceful resister have the " will to conquer "
which Foch calls " the first condition of victory? " 10 He
surely does. Indeed, he must have an indomitable will to
victory in order to endure the suffering put upon him.
Moreover, he has a stronger incentive to win than has the
ordinary soldier in war, for by this new way the final
result is sure and settled permanently, and with a great
release of energy and happiness for all concerned. No
aftermath of resentment, hatred, bitterness, or revenge. No
necessity for further threats or force.

There are other principles of strategy which also find
parallels here,---such principles as those of the economy of
forces, the importance of information, security, mobility,
endurance, etc.---but we need not discuss all these. The
similarities to the principles of military strategy are
clear.

But the similarities between war and non-violent resistance
are not merely an interesting set of analogies. This entire
chapter to this point answers two doubts,---namely whether
this method of struggle is not utterly foreign and new and
suited only to Oriental peoples, and therefore whether it
could be adopted by people with the modern Western attitude
of mind. The facts that the military virtues are used and
needed in this new form of struggle, and that the principles
of military strategy apply here too, show that if we adopt
this new mode of settling conflicts we will not be entirely
reversing our previous experience, we will not be abandoning
the true principles and values that the human race has
garnered from its age-long experience of war. It may be that
for its first great mass success non-violent resistance had
to be used among a people who have much social awareness and
who had been thoroughly inculcated and disciplined for many
centuries with ideas of non-violence, as the Indians

AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE FOR WAR 37

with their Buddhist, Jain, and Hindu tradition have been.
But after its first success, a desire to use it will arise
in other countries, and its rationale will come to be
understood. Given desire and understanding, the courage,
organizing ability, and disciplinary capacity of Western
peoples is not less than that of Indians. Hence the use of
the method may be expected to spread. The new method is an
advance, an improvement in the art of deciding public
disputes, but not so utterly foreign as to be unworkable by
Western peoples. By fully understanding these relationships
between war and non-violent resistance we may provide
ourselves an assurance with which we may advance to this new
procedure.

In cases where Asiatics have tried to relieve themselves of
the economic and military pressure of European domination
they have complained that the West cannot understand any
language but that of force. If that is true, it means that
the West will be utterly unprepared and helpless in the face
of well-disciplined, thoroughly organized and wisely led
non-violent resistance, especially if it is accompanied by
an equally thorough temporary nonvindictive economic
boycott. The strategic principle of surprise would operate
most dramatically and effectively. To use non-violent
resistance against the West would be complying with
Napoleon's Sixteenth Maxim of War quoted above. But I am
inclined to think that the West will come to understand the
new language fairly soon, once it is shown to be strong
language. The quotation from Sir George Lloyd referred to in
the previous chapter seems to indicate a partial
understanding of the new language, and considerable worry to
boot. The West is in this respect something like a baby who
begins to understand what words mean before he can say any
of them himself. And there can be no doubt that the West
understands the language of economic boycott and decreasing
profits reasonably well. No doubt the West is reluctant to
alter its ways, but that is a different matter. To the
extent that the West does come to understand the new
language more

88

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

deeply, its advance will make settlements and readjustments
quicker and easier.

If in some future conflict both sides should use nonviolent
resistance, that side would win which most deeply
understands and is best disciplined and prepared in this new
method. That would be the side which achieved the most
self-purification, which attained the most social truth and
showed the finest love. It would thereby attain the greater
inner unity and strength, the greater respect from its
opponents and the public.

In summary, we see that non-violent resistance resembles war
:

(1) in having a psychological and moral aim and effect ;

(2) in being a discipline of a parallel emotion and instinct
    ;

```{=html}
<!--->
```
j.  (3) in operating against the morale of the oppo nents ;

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
(4) in principles of strategy ;

(5) in being a method of settling great disputes and
    conflicts ;

(6) in requiring courage, dynamic energy, capacity to endure
    fatigue and suffering, self-sacrifice, self-control,
    chivalry, action ;

(7) in being positive and powerful ;

(8) in affording opportunity of service for a large idea,
    and for glory.

It does not avoid hardships, suffering, wounds or even
death. In using it men and women may still risk their lives
and fortunes and sacrifice all. Nevertheless the
possibilities of casualties and death are greatly reduced
under it, and they are all suffered voluntarily and not
imposed by the non-violent resisters.

It is more efficient than war because it costs far less in
money as well as in lives and suffering. Also usually it
permits a large part of the agricultural and industrial work
of the people to go on, and hence the life of the country
can be maintained during the struggle.

AN EFFECTIVE SUBSTITUTE FOR WAR 39

It is again more efficient than war because " the legitimate
object of war is a more perfect peace." If the peace after
the war is to be better than that which preceded it, the
psychological processes of the conflict must be such as will
create a more perfect peace. You can't climb a mountain by
constantly going down hill. Mutual violence inevitably
breeds hatred, revenge and bitterness,---a poor foundation
for a more perfect peace. The method of nonviolent
resistance, where there really is resistance, so as to bring
all the issues out into the open, and a really new
settlement worked out as nearly as possible in accord with
the full truth of the issues at stake,---this method does
not leave a sense of frustration and will bring a more
perfect peace.

Considering the completeness of its effects, nonviolent
resistance, is as quick and probably quicker than war by
violence. It is a weapon that can be used equally well by
small or large nations, small or large groups, by the
economically weak and by the apparently strong, and even by
individuals. It compels both sides and neutrals to seek the
truth, whereas war blinds both sides and neutrals to the
truth.

As we have already seen and will show further, nonviolent
resistance certainly produces less ill-effect, if any, than
does violent war, and this decrease of ill-effects applies
to the users of non-violence, to the opposing side, and to
society and the world at large.

May we not then fairly describe non-violent resistance as an
effective substitute for war ?

It is realistic in that it does not eliminate or attempt to
eliminate possibilities of conflict and differences of
interest, and includes all factors in the situation both
material and imponderable, physical and psychological . 103

It does not require any nation to surrender any part of its
real sovereignty or right of decision, as a real league of
nations might. It does not surrender the right of
selfdefence, although it radically alters the nature of the
defence. It requires no expensive weapons or armament,

90

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

no drill grounds or secrecy. It does not demoralize those
who take part in it, but leaves them finer men and women
than when the struggle began.

Moreover, the method does not require the machinery of a
government or a large wealthy organization. It may be
practised and skill may be acquired in it in every situation
of life, at home and abroad, by men and women of any and all
races, nations, tribes, groups, classes, or castes, young
and old, rich and poor. That women take part in it is
important. Indeed, they are more effective in it than most
men.

Inasmuch as some of the elements involved are essentially
the same as trust, they have the same energizing effect as
financial credit, only more so. Thus it stimulates and
mobilizes, during the conflict and for a long -time
thereafter, all the idealism and energy of all groups and
parties.

It is much superior to William James' detailed suggestions
in his essay on " A Moral Equivalent for War 9 Â  in that it
does not require State organization, direction or assistance
; it is not used against the exterior forces and conditions
of Nature but against human wrongs and evils. It is
therefore much more dramatic and interesting and alluring,
both for young men and old, and women, too. It has even more
possibilities of high daring, adventure, risk, bravery,
endurance, and truly fine and noble romance than any of the
chivalrous violent fighting of by-gone ages.

May we not therefore say of it in the words which Marshal
Foch used in reference to a different occasion: " The new
kind of war has begun, the hearts of soldiers have become a
new weapon." 11

CHAPTER VIII

NON-VIOLENCE AND THE STATE

Non-violent resistance is the key to the problem of liberty
in the modern State. That seems like a large claim until we
begin to reflect upon the part which force and compulsion
play in all the relationships in which the State takes part.

All observers recognize that compulsion, intimidation and
violence have been and still are a very large and perhaps
predominating element in the State, and especially in
political 'government . 1 If anyone felt inclined to dispute
the scholars on this point, let him examine the figures
showing that the expenditures for past and future wars form
a very high percentage of the total expenditures of the
governments of the majority of nations. To this he should
add the State expenditures for prisons, the administration
of criminal law and a certain part of the administration of
civil law. The State has many fine elements, but they
perhaps do not counterbalance the large part played by force
and compulsion.

This condition of affairs is due not to a particular ruling
class, as the Socialists and Communists would have us
believe, but to an inner psychological attitude which
prevails through all groups and classes in the so-called "
civilized " world. The Marxians say that political forms and
methods are determined entirely by economic forces. We would
say that both political and economic processes, at least in
relation to violence and coercion, are due to still deeper
psychological factors. The amount of coercion and violence
in the State is a reflection or resultant of a similar
tendency and attitude in all our life and activities, both
individual and associative.

The non-violent resister believes that a large part of the
activities of the State are founded upon a mistake,

91

92

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

namely, the idea that fear is the strongest and best
sanction for group action and association. He believes that
fear is divisive and therefore cannot be the foundation for
permanent unity and strength . 2 He believes that in the
family and in education it has now been realized that fear
is not a sound basis for action. There we find substituted
the more positive and growth-stimulating forces of
intellectual curiosity, wonder, love and co-operation. The
nonviolent resister looks forward to a time when a similar
realization will come in regard to the larger associations
of States. He believes that non-violent resistance will
probably be an important means in reaching this realization.

Because of the importance of the factor of 'Compulsion in
the State, it will be desirable to examine a number of
relationships between the State and other groups or
elements, in which violence or non-violence may play a part.
We will consider them as follows :

A. Relations with ordinary rivals or opponents of the
State,---namely, other States and criminals.

B. Relations with unusual opponents,---conscientious
objectors to war and non-violent resisters against some
particular law or against the State itself.

The principles of non-violent resistance can be applied to
diplomacy as well as war, for the two are closely allied . 3
Compared with war, non-violent resistance is a safer and
more effective instrument of policy. By its use the entire
military and naval expenses of all nations can be eliminated
. 4

In so far as diplomacy has been characterized by secrecy and
deceit, the principle of truth involved in nonviolent
resistance will bring about reform. Secrecy and deceit are
signs of fear, but non-violent resistance proceeds upon the
basis of control and eventual elimination of fear. It
insists on truth and openness in all dealings. Gandhi's
practice is a living embodiment of this principle.

Non-violent resistance can be used internationally, with or
without economic boycott as circumstances require. Causes
that some people think cannot be submitted

NON-VIOLENCE AND THE STATE

93

to arbitration may be handled by such means. Mere
nonviolence will not do, as the example of China, in the
past, shows. There must be constructive resistance. The
Indian Non-Co-operative Movement in 1922 gave an example
which was promising.

Attempts to improve international relations absorb the time,
energy and money of many people. While I admire the devotion
shown, most of it seems to me to be wasted because it deals
with symptoms instead of the root of the trouble. It is like
putting poultices on a cancer. War is an institution, and
institutions are external expressions of previous inner
attitudes and ways of thinking.5 To try merely to alter the
institution is like locking the barn door after the horse is
stolen. Even the Mosaic commandment " Thou shalt not kill "
begins psychologically at the wrong end of the problem.

World courts, leagues of nations, peace pacts and peace
congresses do little toward improving the inner attitudes or
psychological dispositions and habits of mind. Most of the
peacemakers work only on externals, and disregard deep
seated inconsistencies and forces working for war in many
parts of the economic, social, educational and organized
religious systems. 6 To say this is not to oppose their
effort, but only to wish that it might be more efficient.

Inasmuch as peacemakers need to be especially sensitive to
the truth, it seems desirable to present here two criticisms
of their activity, for them to ponder. One was well phrased
by Niebuhr :

"...The implication is that England and America are the only
two really solvent nations in the Western World, and that,
since they have what they want and need, it is to their
interest to preach peace. The hungry nations will meanwhile
fail to react to this moral idealism. They will shrewdly and
cynically observe that it is always the tendency of those
who have to extol the virtue of peace and order and to place
those who have not at a moral disadvantage.

" It is quite impossible for the strong to be redemptive in
their relation to the weak if they are not willing to share
the

94

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

weakness of the weak, or at least to equalize in some degree
the disproportion of advantages." 7

Another incisive criticism is made by Trotsky in respect to
a certain sort of pacifism.\^ He says that " a responsible
function is allotted to pacifism in the economy of warfare."
By this he refers to the pacifists who go around talking
about "our sacred duty to do all in our power to preserve
the nation from the horrors of war," yet always carefully
adding, " If war should come, we will all support the
government, of course." Trotsky proceeds: " ' To do
everything in our power against the war,' means to afford
the voice of popular indignation an outlet in the form of
harmless demonstration, after having previously given the
government a guarantee that it will meet with no serious
opposition in the case of war, from the pacifist faction.

" Official pacifism could have desired nothing better. It
could now give satisfactory assurance of imperialistic \*
preparedness After Bryan's own declaration, only one thing
was necessary to dispose of his noisy opposition to war, and
that was, simply, to declare war. And Bryan rolled right
over into the government/ camps. And not only the petite
bourgeoisie, but also the broad masses of the workers, said
to themselves \* \* If our government, with such an
outspoken pacifist as Wilson at the head, declares war, and
if even Bryan supports the government in the war, it must be
an unavoidable and righteous war.' "

It is easy to see how that type of pacifism helps to rally
the entire country to the support of militarists at the time
they most need it. They are glad to let such pacifists throw
a gentle moral glow over affairs before war and then fill
themselves and the masses with moral fervour in support of
war as soon as it comes . 9

International peace requires a development of a world
community . 10 The mood of mutual tolerance, respect and
good will needed for the establishment and operation of such
a community will best be created, in social practice, by the
use of non-violent resistance for the righting of existing
wrongs.

One weakness of most peace proposals is that they all expect
the action to be taken by governments or large

NON-VIOLENCE AND THE STATE 95

organizations, or at least someone else besides the
proposer. The advantage of non-violent resistance is that it
begins at home and can and needs to be practised in all the
small private relations between people as a preparation for
and accompaniment of its use on a large scale. Nobody can
dodge the responsibility for its success. The poorest and
most insignificant can practise it as finely, successfully
and usefully as prime ministers, presidents, financiers,
labour leaders or other powerful persons. Through
non-violent resistance we can reach an active, reasoned
belief in peace which is capable of continuous practice in
all grades of life and all sorts of conflict, so as to
educate everyone into a conviction that it gives better
results, more efficiently, than violence.

The causes of disagreement and conflict between nations are
legion, and need not be discussed here. Yet there is one
group of causes so very important at present that it may not
be out of place to consider it briefly. This is the economic
and political relationship between nations of the temperate
zone and those of the tropics, together with the
international jealousies resulting therefrom between nations
of the former group. It is recognized now in Europe and
America that diversified farming creates economic prosperity
and stability for the farmer and reduces the likelihood of
plant disease, insect pests, market gluts, and other risks.
It also increases the yield per acre. Yet at the same time
Europe and the United States are asking and compelling the
tropics to develop large plantations and single crop
agriculture, to raise in this way rubber, jute, cotton,
hemp, sugar, tobacco, tea, coffee, rice, oil seeds,
cocoanuts, bananas, oranges, pineapples, etc. By this 4 4
mining " of the land the white man is passing a heavy burden
onto the tropics, reducing their prosperity, depleting their
soil, ultimately decreasing their productivity, increasing
their losses from plant disease and insects, and market
depressions . 11 In the long run it has decreased and will
decrease the purchasing power of the tropical

96 THE power of non-violence

markets for manufactured goods. Tropical peoples will be apt
to try to get rid of the incubus.

Some observers say that the present civilization and culture
of the temperate zones is now largely based on tropical
products, such as rubber, cotton, jute, vegetable oils,
coffee, tea, tobacco, spices, etc., and that the tropics
must do their share of maintaining the other civilizations.
Other observers point to the restless energy of inhabitants
of the temperate zones and the relative lethargy of tropical
peoples, and do not see, therefore, how exploitation of the
tropics could be prevented even if it were desirable on
other grounds. Still others believe that industrial nations
ought to exploit the tropics in order to spread the economic
blessings of industrialism over all the human race.

All these beliefs proceed on a denial of choice or
preference to the tropical peoples, and are therefore a form
of violence. Hitherto those peoples have lacked an effective
way to express their preferences, but they are beginning to
learn the use of the economic boycott and more advanced
forms of non-violent resistance. It is all very well to talk
of the economic interdependence of the different nations,
but to use that as a high-sounding excuse for the sort of
exploitation that is now going on will not do. International
trade is excellent, but every nation ought to do its utmost
first to produce its own essential food and clothing,---the
bare necessities of its life as a nation. That policy is not
now followed by the controlling financial, industrial and
political groups of any nation in the Western world, though
perhaps Denmark and one or two other small European
countries are not far from it. A large amount of
self-dependence for the essential necessities of national
life is the economic basis of national self-respect, mutual
international respect and a preventive of economic
parasitism. Beyond and above that let trade proceed as
merrily as it can, but with a minimum of exploitation. And
let each nation and each group within the nation use
non-violent resistance to keep

NON-VIOLENCE AND THE STATE

97

its own minimum low and to educate the holders of power to
make social use of it, and to keep them in that path.

Many of the wrong relations between nations come from wrong
relations between groups within them. For example, the
dependence of Great Britain upon food from abroad, and
consequently part of her imperialism, seems to have been
partly a result of the policy of enclosures beginning about
1400 whereby the poor English farmers were dispossessed of
their lands for the benefit of the more powerful classes. 12
In so far as this general principle is valid, the
improvement of relations between the State and groups within
it would seem to be one means of helping toward sound
international relationships.

Let us now consider the internal relationships of the State.

In all nations there seems to be a ruling group or class.
For example, in England it is the aristocracy, 13 in Russia
it is the Communist Party, in the United States, it is " big
business These groups know the art of government, different
in outer form in different countries, but having many
psychological similarities in all. Up till now the art of
government has been largely the art of producing and
manipulating prides, fears, jealousies, angers, resentments
and divisions among groups and powerful individuals so as
always to keep the control of power within one predominant
group. Consider how subtle and powerful is the manipulation
of social pride and vanity by the ranks, titles, orders,
official rewards, and superiority and inferiority complexes,
in the British aristocracy. Germany formerly showed a
similar spectacle. Other nations use the same methods in
lesser degree. Much political control is based on the
principle of " divide and rule ". These processes involve
much fraud and deceit.

Non-violent resistance is built on principles the opposite
of all this and its practice will purify politics and
government.

P-7

98

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

The group within each State toward which the State uses
compulsory force most constantly is that of the criminals.
It is therefore interesting to find that the attitude and
methods of non-violent resistance are the conclusions toward
which all the experience of penology and the investigations
of psychiatrists, criminologists and social reformers are
steadily tending . 14

If there is ever any reform after forceful punishment or
imprisonment, it is not the force or even the suffering rhat
works the change. That depends upon the reaction of the
suffering person, and cannot take place unless there is
stimulus to some latent or potential goodness in the
criminal. Intelligent kindness is a far more effective
stimulus than any force can be. If force were the true cause
of amendment, then its efficacy would increase with
repetition. But all experience shows that a repetition of
force merely hardens the prisoner and stimulates a desire
for revenge.

Violence and severe punishment have proved unavailing for
thousands of years. The facts compel us to admit that cruel
punishment is not only ineffective but is injurious to
prison wardens and to society as well as to the criminal.
Also we now know that society is itself largely responsible
for the conditions which create criminals. Non-violent
curative methods are the only ones which work or can
possibly work. This means careful psychiatrical or
psychological examinations and psychiatric treatment ;
remedial diet; 15 medical care if need be; training in a
useful craft or occupation; wise general education, good
food, good quarters; decent, kindly, respectful treatment ;
many sorts of stimuli and opportunities for normal
expression and living; wise probation; good juvenile and
delinquent courts. The criminal courts should have only the
function of deciding whether or not the crime has been
committed and the 'accessory facts. They should have no
power of punishment. Thereafter the case should be handled
by physicians, psychiatrists, psychologists , 16 social
workers, teachers, and employment

NON-VIOLENCE AND THE STATE 99

agencies. The object should be not to make good prison' ers
but to make criminals into good citizens.

There are of course many dangerous and probably incurable
criminals at present who require close restraint. They are
the inevitable product of existing defective social
processes and penal systems. They will not disappear nor
will they cease to be manufactured until society itself is
changed for the better. Prison reform and criminal reform
are a part of general social and economic reform.

But when really sound treatment is given the criminals and
when society steps forward in its own reform, the prison
population will greatly decrease. Even the feeble minded and
insane are capable of great improvement by proper treatment.
Sound diet alone has worked wonders in numerous cases.

In the chapters on the psychology of non-violent resistance
we stated that imitation and suggestion are most powerful
when unconscious or subconscious. It is known that drunken
people are very sensitive to suggestion, and that in many
types of insanity the subconsciousness is peculiarly alert
and sensitive. Many insane people seem to have an uncanny
faculty of perceiving the real purposes of those with whom
they come in contact. This type of sensitiveness may prevail
also in certain types of delirium.

This suggests that real non-violent kindness would be a
language which many cases of delirium, insanity, drunkenness
and crime would understand and respond to in more instances
than is ordinarily believed. Certain specific occasions
where non-violence was successful in handling such cases
confirm this conclusion. \^ Good music, especially
participation in well trained choral singing, has been found
in at least one prison to exercise a profound and lasting
beneficial influence on many criminals. Probably there are
countless other unrecorded instances. Doubtless there are
certain types of mental degeneracy where the nervous
integrations are so badly injured that they are incapable of
making any response

t

100 THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

in kind to non-violent treatment. But they may be relatively
few, and capable of unmistakable diagnosis and description.

It would be desirable for criminologists, psychiatrists and
physicians to make a long and careful study of all types of
crime, mental disease or disability in relation to the
possibility and desirability of handling them by wholly
non-violent or non-forceful methods. Too much is now left to
the haphazard experience and hasty generalizations of
wardens, nurses and attendants. Carefully worked out
information codified into rules and made a subject of
intelligent instruction would be of immense assistance to
prisons, houses of correction, reform schools, insane
asylums, hospitals, private nurses, policemen and
physicians. The use of such rules would serve to increase
considerably the respect and affection of many people for
government and corrective and remedial institutions, and
help also in the prompter reform and cure of many criminals
and patients. By careful study it will be possible, I am
confident, to reduce the amount and frequentcy of forcible
restraint very considerably. What we need is a sincere,
persistent, intelligent effort to eliminate it
entirely,---to regard every obstacle thereto as an
indication of our ignorance of human nature rather than as
any inherent impossibility.

Violent defence against thieves and burglars arises out of
our ideas about property. Most killings by thieves and other
criminals are not strictly " in cold blood ", but out of
fear that the victim will somehow harm the criminal. But if
the threatened victim is wholly unafraid, friendly, kind,
generous, and imaginative, there is relatively small chance
of his receiving physical injury. Such considerations
indicate that it will be eventually possible and practicable
to forego violent defence of property. It is a part of the
duty of non-violent resisters to help bring such a state of
affairs to pass. It will be for mankind as a whole a slow
process, but there is no reason why the

NON-VIOLENCE AND THE STATE 101

progress should not be steady and sometimes, and at some
places, rapid. â¦

It is interesting to realize that non-violent resistance can
be used both by the State and the prisoners. If the State
considers itself the injured party and the criminal the
attacker, it can offer him non-violent reformatory
treatment. If the criminal is mentally competent and feels
that really he is the victim of an unjust social system and
brutal wardens and police, he too may offer non-violent
resistance and do his share toward prison reform. In this
connection, Gandhi's instructions for the jail conduct of
political prisoners are of interest, though we have not
space to quote them here . 19

In some instances of sentencing innocent men to long
imprisonments and even death, there has been much severe
criticism directed against the governors, judges and other
officials involved. This seems to me both a misconception of
the real forces at work and a waste of energy. The fault
does not lie with the men in office. The real causes are
psychological and spiritual, and it is these and this
institutionalized form that must be resisted -and
transformed. Governments are the external results of inner
concepts and attitudes. They are the institutionalized forms
of our habitual inner attitudes and ideas. Each one of us is
partly responsible\* The re-education must be directed
primarily at this foundation, though, of course, it should
find expression in all situations and relationships.

The police system also needs modification in the direction
of constantly less violence. Certain police functions are
necessary in any complex modern society,---such as directing
traffic in city streets, providing information for
strangers, helping to settle altercations without violence,
helping lost children, directing large crowds, providing a
disciplined orderly nucleus of leaders and helpers in times
of public disaster such as files, floods, earthquakes,
severe storms, epidemics of disease, etc. Even after the
advantages of non-violence become widely

102

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

recognized there will still be people whose habits of
violence persist, whose self-control is poor, or who will
still occasionally hope to gain their ends by violence. For
a generation or two after such recognition it may be
necessary to permit the police to use a greatly restricted
amount of physical compulsion in certain cases where
physical violence has already been uesd or overtly
threatened by some other person. Experience in England over
a number of years indicates that under such circumstances
probably no firearms, sticks or brutality would be needed.
Certainly strong efforts should be made to stop most police
violence immediately and eliminate all police violence as
rapidly as we can educate society to non-violence and
eradicate the conditions which create violent crime. The
policeman of the future by his example and leadership in
firm, intelligent, strong, creative kindness can do much to
educate the masses to non-violnce as a part of daily routine
life. It is in this direction, one hopes, that police
systems will evolve, and indeed they must so evolve if we
are ever to create a truly sound political order.

CHAPTER IX

PERSUASION

Â 

The foregoing chapters may have made non-violent resistance
seem plausible. Yet many people who read them will still be
sceptical of its effectiveness. This method under Gandhi's
leadership, after over twenty years of effort, has not yet
won freedom for India. The European mass persecutions, the
world-wide bloodshed, destruction, starvation, ruthless
cruelties, and horrors of all sorts during the past decade
or more give pause to anyone. One's hopes are halted not
only by the vastness of the devilment but also by its
thoroughness.

Would highly disciplined and wholly determined aggressors
ever be stopped by deeds of kindly persuasion? Could the
holders of ultimate political and economic

PERSUASION

103

power really be persuaded to yield up their power by the use
of non-violent resistance? The history of mankind is so full
of selfishness, violence, and cruelty that the possibility
of improvement often seems doubtful. The power of intrenched
interests is so immense and the energy of organized
aggression is so tremendous that it is very difficult to see
how gentle resistance plus love could either effectively sap
such power or overcome or divert such energy. The
destruction of both ponderables and imponderables by modern
military weapons is so terrific that it is hard to believe
that the power of slow acting, slight, or gentle forces can
be superior. Are pacifists only naive builders of false
Utopias ?

Such experiences and doubts call for a still more searching
study of the way and the power of gentle kindness and of
firm voluntary suffering in moral resistance to a violent
opponent. We must seek to comprehend in more detail how and
why love is persuasive and creative. Let us try to
appreciate, therefore, still further the importance of tiny,
subtle forces and try to understand as fully as possible how
they act and why their cumulative power is so great.

In nature the most important forces are silent. Examples are
gravitation, sunlight, electro-magnetic forces, bacteria,
the growth processes of plants and animals, the effects of
environment. A considerable portion of material forces, such
as gravitation, magnetism, heat, electric waves and
sub-molecular forces, are, even under the microscope,
invisible. Most of such forces, aside from their results,
are unperceivable by man's sense of touch. A large number of
important foci of energies, such as yeasts, cells, genes,
hormones, vitamins, ions and protons, are exceedingly small.
The operations of many of the forces essential to human life
are relatively slow, and, in their effects, cumulative.
Instances are the building of soil on which all land life
depends, the warming up each spring of the soil and air in
temperate climes, the full maturing of human beings, the
flowering of a civilization.

104

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

Many forces which mould human beings, as for example the use
of symbols or the desire for social status, are exceedingly
subtle, to be appreciated and used only by the most
observant. Yet how potent controls have those two forces
been in the history of persons, villages, and empires!

In many cases exceedingly small forces can and do markedly
influence vastly larger systems or organisms. A quart of oil
dripped from the bow of a ship in a storm will, by the
action of increased surface tension, prevent huge and very
powerful waves from breaking, and this action takes place
over a large area. A dilution of the animal hormone called
adrenalin amounting to only one part in 250,000,000 will,
when injected into the veins of a rabbit, cause a distinct
effect on the blood vessels of its ear. The pituitary
hormone when diluted to only one part in 100,000,000,000
causes strong uterine contractions in the female animal.
Again, the minimum lethal dose of crude botulinus toxin
filtrate is a fraction of a cubic centimeter represented by
the number 1 over the number 4 followed by twenty ciphers.
The odour of mercaptan in a dilution of 1 :
1,000,000,000,000 is perceivable by a dog. The odour of a
female Chinese silk moth (Actias selene), although wholly
unperceivable by a person directly beside her, attracted to
her a number of previously marked male moths released at a
distance of 11.6 kilometers (7.2 milesjr away. 1 This
ability of exceedingly small quantities to alter a
relatively large system can be proved in that branch of
mathematics called differential equations.

The ability of a minute force to alter a system which by
comparison is very large is most frequently and clearly seen
where the large system is complex or delicately balanced.
The body of a human being is such a complex and delicately
balanced set of forces and, as we know in the instance of
hormones, the entire bodily poise, development, health and
control is altered by the hormones in exceedingly small
quantities. This is also true of the psychic aspect of man.
Such subtle entities as hopes, with

PERSUASION

105

no apparent basis in facts, will guide and sustain a person
or a nation through years of effort or endurance. Think, ior
example, how the hopes of the Jews have buoyed them up
through millenniums of political subjection. Society is a
system of many complex forces in mobile equilibrium, and at
various times the balance is delicate. It is subject
therefore to alteration by minute forces.

In other instances the tiny forces affect the great mass by
an accumulation. " Constant dropping wears away a stone."
Stimuli far below what is called " the threshold of
response," when sufficiently repeated, may cause an
accumulative " staircase effect," often quite powerful. 2

The accumulation may be by way of rhythm. A slight impulse
may cause an infinitesimal yielding in a huge mass whose
momentum makes it move back like a pendulum into the
original position and beyond. As this takes time, the
movement has in it the first stage of a rhythm. If the
original impulse is applied again at the proper place and
instant in the reaction, the first infinitesimal change is
increased by a tiny degree. Repetition of this process in
properly timed rhythm will eventually eause a very great
change in the position of the large mass. Anyone who has
enjoyed a swing in a hammock has, in homely fashion,
experienced this. Engineers say that the properly timed
tread of a cat could destroy a huge bridge.

Thus, many of the most important forces are not perceivable
by our crude human senses. Aside from their ultimate results
those forces in themselves are not dramatic or adequately
appreciated by the majority of mankind. The connection
between these imponderable forces and their ultimate effects
is often so subtle or distant or slow that we fail to
understand the originating forces. Yet, despite the slowness
of human recognition, these forces are none the less real
and powerful. Radio waves, for example, have always been
present in storms, but man learned about them only within
the last 60 years. Those

106

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

who come to appreciate and understand such subtle forces can
put them to human use with immeasurable benefit.

Such a slight and subtle but immensely powerful force is the
combination of loving-kindness and nonviolent resistance.

Let us see further.

A great number of biological experiments have shown that
living animals respond in one way or another to many kinds
of stimuli. Such stimuli may be mechanical, electrical,
thermal, chemical, light, changes of atmospheric pressure,
changes of humidity of surrounding air, smells, food intake,
work, glandular secretions, infections, drugs, emotions, and
in man, sentiments and thoughts. These researches have also
shown that the responses affect one or more of practically
all the stimulated animal's organs, tissues or functions,
and that the responses occur in phases. 3 There are
different kinds of phases. A onephase or monophase response
is in one direction only, say a continuous increase in
activity of some sort. A dual phase or biphasic effect is
first one kind of reaction and then after a while a reversal
to a reaction of just the opposite kind. Cocaine, for
instance, in a dilution of 1: 1000 first constricts the
blood vessels of a frog and then dilates them.

Kotschau showed in a wealth of experiments 4 that all
responses of living tissues to stimuli could be grouped as
follows: a slight stimulus will produce a weak monophasic
response; a medium strength stimulus causes a double phasic
response which has a stronger effect at the beginning
followed by a reversal; while a strong stimulus or a very
large dose causes a short, intense effect followed by
irreversible injury. As an example of Kotschau's rule,
Tanaka found that a small amount of adrenalin put into the
blood stream of an animal shortens the time of clotting of
blood and this shortening effect continues; a moderate
amount of adrenalin at first lengthens the blood clotting
time and then shortens it; while a large quantity of

PERSUASION

107

adrenalin at first shortens the blood clotting time and then
destroys the clotting ability permanently.

Experience as well as laboratory experiment indicates that
the stimuli which cause animal organisms to grow are slight,
causing a reaction of the monophasic type and must be many
times repeated. Medical experience also indicates that in
general the drug stimuli which most effectively and without
harmful reactions restore a sick organism to health are also
slight, causing a one-phase response without reversal . 5

Consider the bearing of these observations on our subject.

The believer in non-violence does not assume with Rousseau
that all persons at the beginning of their lives are
inherently good, nor with Calvin and Barth that they are
inherently and continuously sinful with only sporadic
aspirations or goodness. He assumes that each person has
inherently all the time both capacities, for good and for
evil. Both potentialities are plastic. Which capacity will
develop and how far it will develop depends on which one is
stimulated to cause growth. The vast amount of evil in
history has been largely due to the kinds of stimuli to
which man has allowed himself to be subject. So the believer
in non-violence assumes, on the basis of what seems to be
sound historical and psychological evidence 6 that, except
for a few congenital mental defectives, every person has in
him some tiny spark or potentiality of goodness. This is
true no matter how encrusted that potentiality may be with
habitual pride, prejudice, hatred, callousness, cruelty, or
criminality. ,

Thus the faith of the non-violent resister in the ultimate
flowering of the good potentialities of all people is not a
blind or naive faith. It has a solid foundation in the above
described intrinsic quality of all living protoplasm---the
fact that all living organisms respond to stimuli, and that
in the more complex organisms the responses are adapted to
the stimuli so as to tend to preserve the species.
Adaptation to environment is the large-scale

108

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

proof of this. In the most complex and delicately balanced
organisms, such as man, the response tends to partake of the
same quality as the stimulus.

Moreover, as we have already seen, responses are called
forth by exceedingly small stimuli, such stimuli as in the
moral field would be called gentle.

We have already mentioned the well-known biological fact
that growth of living tissue is caused not by harsh, violent
stimuli, but by prolonged repetition of slight or gentle
stimuli. This is conclusively proved not only by laboratory
experiments but by what takes place every spring. After the
winter solstice the days gradually lengthen by intervals of
one to three minutes---just that little bit more of sunshine
each day. For thirty or forty repetitions of this stimulus
there is, \> in northern continental lands anyhow, no
apparent effect upon vegetation. To a laboratory
experimenter these apparent failures would be very
discouraging. He would say, " After such a series of flat
failures it is preposterous to expect that stimulus to
work." But in nature, after sixty or more such repetitions,
there is a cumulative effect. The green grass begins to
show, the buds swell and burst, the birds fly north, and
after one hundred and twenty or more such stimuli we have a
vast surge of energy and life in the vegetable, insect, and
animal worlds---the spring and summer. This has gone on for
hundreds of millions of years.

This principle of stimulus and response also acts upon man's
intellectual faculties. All education, and indeed the growth
of civilizations are based on this fact. We assume, for
example, that every child has a potential capacity for
mathematics. We subject the child to many repetitions of the
gentle stimulus of solving mathematical problems in school,
the problems increasing in difficulty day after day. After
eight or ten years of development under that regime the
child can easily solve mathematical problems which to Plato
and Aristotle, the wisest men of ancient Greece, were
utterly impossible. Part of the

I

PERSUASION 109

advance is due to improved mathematical notation, but much
also to thorough use of suitable stimuli. The process of
stimulus and response can likewise immensely enhance man's
emotional and moral faculties.

Thus, growth in response to gentle, appropriate, and
sufficiently repeated stimuli is a sure thing, surer and
more enduring than any form of political government, any
economic action, or any military campaign. It is as sure as
the fact that there is life on this planet. It can be relied
upon without any hesitation or doubt.

Dictatorships cannot long grow or endure, because

in them the stimuli are not gentle and so are incompatible

with the inherent process of growth. That which cannot

grow cannot adapt itself, and so cannot endure in this

modern world of rapid social changes.

#â 

Thus the believer in non-violence is convinced that, because
the potentiality for goodness exists in every living person,
the potentiality itself is living, is therefore subject to
the law of stimulus and response, and hence is capable of
growth until, compared with the harmful living factors in
any given person, it becomes as strong, or even stronger.
This, I think, is what Jesus meant when he told his
disciples to forgive seventy times seven---repeating many,
many times the gentle stimulus to unity implied by
forgiveness.

The believer in non-violence is also convinced from the
examples in nature that the potentialities for goodness
which are in a group, a corporation, or a nation can by
suitable stimuli be made to grow beyond their potentialities
for evil. The law of stimulus and response applies as much
to a forest as to a single tree, to the actions of a herd of
elephants as to the actions of one elephant. Among human
beings a collective does not have initiative. That has to be
supplied by individuals. A human collective, however, may
have more versatility and intellectual range than an
individual. But by means of suitable organization and
discipline, groups are capable of highly moral actions

110 THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

and reactions. Examples are found in the various struggles
by non-violent resistance under Gandhi's leadership.
Disciplined groups of several thousand people, mostly
peasants, stood up to attacks by police with clubs, or to
gunfire by soldiers, yet maintained complete non-violence
and did not run. Other examples are the building of European
cathedrals and the growth of consumers' cooperatives.

The statement that human collectives are less moral than the
individuals which compose them is a highly doubtful
generalization. The ability of a human collective to behave
morally depends on such factors as The extent and duration
of its organization, the structure of the organization, its
size and the sizes of any component subgroups in it, the
inter-relationships of the subgroups and the kind of
integration among them, the kind of discipline (if any) to
which the members have been subject, the duration of that
discipline, the clarity of the ideas of the group and the
extent of their permeation among the members, the extent and
clarity of understanding of the group's purposes among its
members, the loftiness of the common ideal, the simplicity
or complexity of their general purpose, the quality of
leadership, and the moral character of the environment. With
so many variables as that, the broad generalization of the
immorality of all human collectives is not valid. It
disregards too much pertinent evidence. It does not square
with the results of a wealth of patient and careful
biological experiments and observations . 7

Some of the doubts about the efficacy of non-violence are
due to overlooking the necessity, in most cases, for many
repetitions of the gentle stimulus, and forgetting that this
takes time. We may learn also that in order to bring best
results the stimuli need to be spaced in a certain rhythm.
Everybody realizes that a war is made up of many, many
skirmishes and battles, but plenty of nonviolent resisters
seem to expect this other kind of struggle to be successful
and finished in short order. If success is

PERSUASION

111

not prompt, they get badly discouraged. The lack of
immediate victory does not prove the inefficiency of the
method. The discouragement proves only a failure to
understand the process. Those same people realize that in
order to become a physician a person must go through eight
years of grammar school, four years of high school, four
years of college, four years of medical school, and sixteen
to eighteen months of hospital interneship---in all,
twenty-five or twenty-six years of preparation. And success
in the profession can come only after at least five more
years of work. All that time is generally considered well
spent. Yet in India and elsewhere some critics have called
the method of non-violence folly because the teaching of it
to a nation of 400,000,000 people, and their struggle to win
freedom by such means, have won only partial advance after
an effort lasting twenty-five years. If freedom is worth
anything it is worth fifty or a hundred years of unstinted
effort in rigid adherence to the method. The use of this
non-violent method leads to steady improvement, while the
use of violence gives a double-phase result, with a reversal
and ultimate loss of what at first may seem to be won. It
should be realized that in India each time a large-scale
collective application of the method w\^as used---in
1920-21, again in 1930-32, and again 1942-43---the unity of
the desire of all parties and sections of Indians for
freedom has steadily increased, despite the British
governmental propaganda about Indian disunity. Also, Indian
courage and self-respect have immensely increased.

Some sociologists believe that there can be no moral
progress in society because, they say, the effort involved
in any moral reform is always followed by an equal reaction,
a swing-back of the pendulum. Society has an inertia, they
aver, that resists all substantial change.

To the extent that society is a loosely integrated organism,
an organism in, as it were, a low stage of development, it
would .tend to react to a stimulus in one of the three ways
described by Kotschau as mentioned above.

112

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

In response to violent stimuli or to reforms introduced by
coercive or deceitful methods it would presumably react in
double phase, first yielding to the violence and then later
reversing its acquiescence. But in response to honest,
gentle stimuli, society would be likely to act in one-phase
fashion with no swing-back. Note, for example, that the
social alterations caused by the stimuli of using the spade
and the automobile, a tool and a machine, have been constant
without, as yet, any repudiation or reverse response.

Hence the above cited belief of certain sociologists seems
to be too broad an assertion. If a reform be introduced into
society by a gentle persuasion such as nonviolent
resistance, the analogy would indicate that the reaction
would be monophasic and permanent. Considering society as an
organism in a low stage of development, it may well be
capable of growth into more complex integration. If so, the
stimulus thereto should be non-violent. Or society may
sometimes be sick and lacking its normal balance. To restore
its equilibrium and health the thing needed is a series of
non-violent stimuli.

Growth has another aspect that helps to explain the power of
non-violence. Growth results in more than increase in size.
When an organism grows there is a development of its ability
to reach and use a wider range of energy. When a seed
sprouts, its stem and its new leaves enable it to tap the
energies of sunlight. The growing animal becomes able to
roam over a considerable territory and thus enlarge its food
sources, use the protection of vegetation, and perhaps
enlist the support of some of its own kind. The growth of a
highly developed organism like man enables him to reach,
mobilize, organize and use a constantly increasing range of
energies and subtle forces, some in the outer world of
nature, others in the intellectual and moral realms through
the co-operation and mutual assistance of his fellowmen.

The wider range of energy met and used by the growing
organism enables it better to maintain its equilibrium:

PERSUASION

113

and its life in the face of adverse forces it may meet. Thus
it acquires the ability to adapt itself to changes. This
ability promotes survival.

Since growth takes place in response to gentle stimuli only,
it would seem clear that the greater the use of gentle
stimuli the more extensive become the possibilities of
growth in more and more directions, and hence the wider
becomes the range of energies available to the user of
gentleness. 8 In contact with this wider range of
increasingly subtler forces he is either unconsciously
supported by them or is consciously able to mobilize them
and call upon them for support. The more he understands the
method and the more he becomes aware of these subtler
forces, the more he can rally them in support of a purpose
that promotes their harmonious activity. By extension, that
group, tribe or species which relies increasingly on gentle
stimuli has the best chance for survival. That is why
sensitive and delicately poised man has survived the
monsters of earlier ages. 9

For these reasons the intelligent user of non-violent
resistance has for his help far greater total resources of
energy and power than does his violent opponent. Some of
these subtle powers are slow in action, but they are
inevitably sure. History indicates that they are also more
enduring than the forces of violence.

In nature the succession of gentle stimuli creating growth
heals the effects of all the violent destructive forces such
as earthquakes, floods, avalanches, lightning, and fires.
Also, by building up forests and grasses and promoting
ecologically useful wild animals, the gentle stimuli control
the effects of storms and prevent floods and soil erosion.
In the human realm the stimuli of gentle kindness not only
heal the effects of violence but create relationships and
situations which prevent violence.

Thus the power of non-violence and love is so similar to and
so harmonious with the other subtle creative forces of
nature that in the human realm it may be considered one of
the higher conserving and growth-producing

P-8

114 THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

forces of nature. As such, it is in the long run more
powerful than violence.

We have stated that one of the essential elements of
successful non-violent resistance is love, and that love is
powerful. As Walt Whitman so finely said :

" Be not dishearten'd---affection shall solve the problems
of Freedom yet ;

Those who love each other shall become invincible--Were you
looking to be held together by lawyers ?

Or by an agreement on a paper? or by arms ?

Nay, nor the world, nor any living thing, will so cohere."
10

Besides the use of many repetitions of gentle stimuli, one
other explanation of the power of love is this: Fullfledged
love is the sentiment that grows out of awareness of the
unity and wholeness of the entire human species, and
expresses that awareness in all sorts of ways. The whole of
anything is not only more than, but also different from, the
sum of its parts . 11 Deeds informed by a loving desire for
the unity and wholeness of society therefore make contact
with and enlist the help not only of the forces of the
separate elements of society but also of the forces that
comprise and come out of its unity and wholeness. We know
that sentiments---that is, organized systems of ideas and
emotions---are extremely powerful in initiating, sustaining,
and guiding all human conduct. Of all the sentiments, love
is, for the above reasons, both quantitatively and
qualitatively superior. Therefore, in the long run
disciplined love always wins, and even in the short run
disciplined love wins often enough to make it far, far
superior to violence. Furthermore, intelligent love promotes
deeds which provide normal relationships, healthful
surroundings, and healthful and creative outlets for energy
of all people of all ages. It thus reduces frustrations to a
minimum, reduces anger, resentment, and violence.

In a conflict, what needs to be done is to change not people
as such, but their attachment to certain ideas, sentiments,
desires, and assumptions. Such changes are

PERSUASION

115

not effected by killing or wounding the opponents. Usually
being wounded and having friends or fellow countrymen killed
does not cause people to abandon their ideas, sentiments,
and so forth, but only to postpone trying to carry them out.
To get opponents to adopt new ideas, new sentiments, new
assumptions, you have to get them to want the new ideas, new
sentiments, and new assumptions. The -word " persuade "
means literally " to make (something) sweet " to somebody.
The new ideas must be made attractive to the opponents. Then
they will take and hold the new ideas of their own will, and
then the task is done. Ideas are not made attractive by
harming the people whom you want to have adopt them. But
love and disciplined non-violence are persuasive. lla

In the persuasion of non-violent resistance there must be
not only gentleness and love but also truth. All human
beings make mistakes. Adherence to truth requires public
admission of our mistakes. If out of pride or ignorance we
wait until others show up our error, then people mistrust
both our ability and our honesty. But public confession of
faults promotes trust because it shows (1) a realization of
one's likeness to all other people in respect to liability
to error, hence a sense of human unity, (2) humility, (3)
honesty, (4) disinterestedness toward one's own personal
fortunes, (5) willingness to pay the price of mistakes,
hence (6) a sense of responsibility, (7) courage, (8) a
revival of intelligence after a lapse into stupidity, and
therefore (9) worthiness to be given another opportunity,
(10) a realization of an intellectual prerequisite to
progress. When I have made a mistake in arithmetic I cannot
correct it and get the right answer until after I have
admitted, at least to myself, that I had made the mistake.
Thus in the moral realm frankness and humility are modes of
intelligence.

These are some of the reasons, for example, why during World
War II, after Prime Minister Churchill voluntarily admitted
to Parliament that the Government had made many blunders and
caused grave losses and he

116

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

could promise little ahead but blood and tears, Parliament
immediately gave him an overwhelming vote of confidence.
Unfortunately, in regard to their mistakes toward other
nations, neither Churchill nor the British ruling class are
as yet intelligent enough to make public admission of
errors. This is true of practically all political leaders in
all nations. The only exceptions I can think of are Lenin
and Gandhi.

Since trust is an essential prerequisite to persuasion, and
truth creates trust, persistent devotion to truth at all
costs is strongly persuasive.

Summing it up, we see that non-violent resistance with love
is able to conquer cruelty, violence, aggression, and other
abuses of power because (1) the power of many repeated
gentle stimuli to cause surpassing growth of the potential
decencies in the opponent is sure, (2) the user of gentle
stimuli has aiding him a wider and more enduring range of
forces than does the user of violence, (3) the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts and as love expresses the
unity and wholeness of the human species, it is a power
greater than those that express only individuals or other
parts of humanity, (4) intelligent love acts in advance to
reduce or prevent frustrations and thereby to reduce
violence to a minimum, (5) truth is an important element in
non-violence, and as truth promotes mutual trust, it is
highly persuasive, (6) these powers are effective between
groups as well as between individuals.

But in a situation which is very dangerous, or where much is
at stake, if someone urges me to use a new instrument, I do
not adopt it when I merely learn what in general are the
forces which make it work. I must also understand why and
how it works in specific dangers or toward specific
obstacles. I must feel sure that the risks are less than
those of formerly used methods, and that the estimate of
probabilities is more acurate than formerly.

Heretofore we have considered only broad classes of
conflicts. Let us now examine in more detail certain

PERSUASION

117

common obstacles, namely cruelty, loss of liberty,
aggression, desire to dominate, dual loyalties, hostile
sentiments, the opponent's habits, paranoia or megalomania
of the opponent, the opponent's assumptions, interracial
conflicts, the intense discipline of certain opponents, and
our own weaknesses.

Gross, persistent, intentional cruelty toward helpless
people, such as the Nazi treatment of the Jews, the Japanese
treatment of the Chinese, the British political whippings of
Indians, and American lynchings and police . third-degree
methods, is so revolting that most decent people become
indignant and can see no effective answer but
counter-violence.

We have already discussed 12 some of the ways by which
non-violent resistance tends to reduce cruelty. But there is
another kind of cruelty which the psycho\* logists call
sadism. It is intentional. Its exercise gives the cruel
person pleasure. In it there is a desire for power and an
element of aggression which is the result of accumulated
prior resentments created by severe repression or
humiliation. The aggression is " displaced "; that is, it is
not expressed toward the person who caused the original
frustration but against another and weaker person. The
desire for power is to make up for the sense of weakness
felt at the time of the original frustration. Used against
this type of cruelty, non-violent resistance alters the
desire for power, as already described, by the reaction of
the spectators teaching the cruel person that that sort of
power is disadvantageous. The gentle resister proposes
another channel in which the cruel person may display a more
valuable kind of power. By respect for the personality of
the cruel attacker, non-violent resistance assuages the
affront to self-respect which carried over from the original
humiliations or frustrations suffered by the cruel person.
These developments tend to reduce this kind of cruelty.

Another cause of cruelty is what psychologists call "
projection," resulting in what is generally called making

118

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

a scapegoat of someone. Projection occurs where one has a
defect of character or a wrongful motive the existence and
evil character of which he is dimly aware but unwilling to
acknowledge even to himself. This creates a conflict within
him between his lower nature and his conscience. He has an
underlying feeling of shame and a sense of guilt. In
desperation he proceeds to " project " the fault or harmful
motive upon, or impute it to, some other person or group of
persons. Then he can speak of it openly, blind himself
completely to its existence in himself, and attack the other
person for it. Thus by this self-deception he relieves his
conflict and satisfies his conscience. For his own sins the
guilty person thus makes the innocent person suffer. The
innocent person becomes a scapegoat. 13 In such a situation
the guilty person by the energy of his conflict and the
force of his conscience often is fearfully cruel.

Those who for a long time have believed in the power of
gentle loving-kindness will have acted accordingly, and
their deeds will have had a constructive, preventive action
which will usually protect them against cruel aggression.
For example, because the Quakers during and after World War
I fed several million starving German children and mothers,
they were less restricted or molested by the Nazis than any
other religious group. Such kindness was shown by many Danes
toward the Nazis prior to 1939, and the results have
mollified Nazi treatment of Denmark.

In a case of projection, non-violent resistance alone can
act but slowly. The processes described in previous chapters
operate gradually to bring the attacker to true knowledge of
himself. The insistence upon human unity and truth
eventually overcome the divisiveness of the cruel person.
But in order to secure this result the nonviolence must be
free from fear or anger. In some instances, in order to
provide the repetitions of stimuli mentioned above, there
have to be many nonviolently resisting victims before the
result is obtained. Yet, as compared with the number of
victims where the reaction

PERSUASION 119

to the cruelty is fear, anger, and violence, non-violent
resistance is less costly and more effective.

" But while we wait for this result," you may exclaim, " the
aggressor will deprive us of all our liberty and then will
educate our children into his pernicious doctrines! Liberty
is of supreme value. How can non-violence preserve it? "

Liberty is not an entity which can be secured by direct
effort. Liberty is a by-product. It is the result of the
creation of mutual trust and respect. Liberty is a moral
affair and can be won only by moral means. After it has once
been created and is threatened, true liberty cannot be
preserved by violence, but only by the same moral means by
which it was originally created. That wars have shifted the
location of power is true, but where the result seems to
have been freedom, that freedom is, I believe, the result of
other causes that were non-violent. In the past, true
freedom has been won only by mutual respect for personality,
by trusting in the power of truth, and by cultivating unity,
kindness, and love, not merely as sentiments but by
concrete, habitual deeds. Where those efforts and attitudes
are found continuously, there will be freedom. Freedom has
declined because we have failed to practice our ideals.

Some civil and religious liberties in the West were
purchased for us by the non-violent resistance of the first
Quakers in England and by the creative, non-violent
activities of others. Many of our modern freedoms are
spurious, being merely the luxurious margins allowed us by
the ruling group because such allowance was the simplest way
to keep the ship of state quiet and easy to handle, and
because technological advances made possible considerable
freedom to the majority without any loss of real control by
the ruling group. Such freedoms are not fully moral, nor
were they earned. In times of war and considerable economic
decline they will decrease or depart.

120

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

When our liberties are taken from us by aggressors, whether
foreign or domestic, we must again earn them. We can earn
them only by payment of the price, namely non-violent
resistance and the development of those conditions that
create mutual trust.

So it is a mistake to think that liberty is of supreme
value. What is of supreme value is the origin of liberty,
namely, non-violent conduct and the above-mentioned elements
which create mutual trust and mutual respect. Let those who
call themselves Christians note that Christ said exceedingly
little about freedom or its worth, but he laid very great
stress on those attitudes and acts which result in mutual
respect and trust.

Society has always regarded social order more important even
than liberty, and in times of crisis has permitted
deprivation of liberties in the hope of securing order. But
inasmuch as permanent order cannot be created or maintained
by violence but only by the elements which create mutual
respect and trust, the vigorous maintenance of those
elements is more important even than order, for they are the
creators not only of freedom but also of order. Christ also
said very little about the importance of order.

Nor should parents be too troubled lest a cruel dictator
entice their children into accepting his doctrines ;
Children who from birth have lived in an atmosphere of
national frustration or resentment which has created a
certain type of leader will readily accept the teachings of
that leader. He expresses vocally what they subconsciously
feel. But the children of a conquered nation will not accept
the doctrines of a foreign conqueror. The cruelties and
coercions of defeat create an energy that cannot be overcome
by coercion. The history of every conquered nation is proof
of that fact. Even a domestic tyrant cannot extirpate the
love of liberty. It is inherent in man's very physical
nervous constitution.

PERSUASION

121

But we still must try to discover how the tremendous energy
of aggression can be reduced by non-violent resistance.
Modern psychological studies indicate that a very great deal
of aggression is due to earlier frustrations . 14 Every time
a frustration occurs in a person's life, from earliest
infancy onward, the energy of the thwarted desire is damned
up inside and, unless it finds a complete and wholly
satisfying substitute channel and goal, it remains bottled
up as explosive energy awaiting an opportunity for release.
Or we may liken the energies of frustrated desires to so
many internal wound-up watch springs. We may say that there
is a psychological law of conservation or persistence of the
energy of emotions and of desires. People who have suffered
many small or a few great frustrations have a great
accumulation of energy seeking expression. And because of
the persistence of resentment from the original frustration,
this energy does not usually find release in ordinary work
but prefers some form of aggression against people.

The very severe disciplines in Japanese family and national
life may well have accumulated sufficient frustrations to
have caused part of the Japanese cruelties toward Chinese,
as at Nanking. National frustrations of Germans could thus
account for many Nazi excesses. Both British and Japanese,
being island peoples have unusually strong " in-group "
loyalties and clannishness. Perhaps the British upper class
custom of sending their sons away from home to boarding
school when in their very early teens creates loneliness,
emotional losses, and frustrations which later find
expression in imperialist aggression and harshness toward
subject coloured races. Unhappy child life and frustrations
may account for many American cruelties.

Non-violent resistance saps this dammed up energy by showing
respect for the personality of the aggressor and thus
mollifying some of the earlier resentments. Gentle
resistance mobilizes and calls into action outside
influences which help to change the character of the

122

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

aggressor and his modes of action. Again, non-violent
resistance deprives the violent aggressor of the
satisfactions which he would get from attacking a person who
showed fear, anger, or counter-violence. And kindness
prepares the way for the acceptance by the aggressor of a
proffered substitute goal and channel for his energies.

Besides frustrations, there are other causes for aggression,
such as possessiveness and fear of strangers. These causes
operate also among animals. Because in earlier chapters,
either expressly or implicitly, we have indicated how these
may be dealt with, we will not consider them further here.

Bift the above-mentioned factors do not always offset all
the energy of aggression. The absorption of the surplus
energy of aggression rests on a different set of
considerations.

In relation to all other species of living organisms, the
human species is a unit. Its elements are individual persons
and they have among themselves certain differences and
certain similarities. However important the differences may
seem, the similarities and unities are deeper, more
enduring, and more important. This is true also as between
various groups, such as civilizations, races, nations,
tribes, religious groups, and social classes. The unities
and the interworking of differences are such that the human
species as a whole may be considered a loosely integrated
organism. If that be true, then, as in any organism, an
injury to one part harms all the otherparts, injures their
harmonious working and upsets their equilibrium. Each part
suffers and endures the suffering. If the original injury is
an infection some of the neighbouring parts, which are, so
to say, wholly innocent, may even die from the injury. In a
healthy organism the parts thus indirectly injured do not
strike back but, as it were, offer their energies for a
curative process. Their energy absorbs and cushions the
shock to the whole organism. Thus the equilibrium of the
whole organism is gradually restored.

PERSUASION

123

When by aggression the moral equilibrium of society has been
upset, in order to restore that equilibrium and regain moral
health, part of the energy of the aggression must be
cushioned and absorbed by the non-violent voluntary
suffering of persons who may be wholly innocent of the
frustrations which caused the aggression, and relatively
innocent of possessiveness or fear of strangers.

The innocent have always suffered for the sins of the
guilty. If each of us reaped only what he individually had
sown, no more and no less, it would be unjust for the
innocent to suffer for the guilty. But in this world each
person does not reap, either of good or evil, just what he
has sown. Each of us enjoys a share of the entitre
technical, intellectual, and moral advances that have
accumulated in society since the dawn of human history. This
is vastly more than any of us could make by himself or
deserves or has earned. In the same way each of us carries
part of the load of mistakes and wrongs committed by our
forefathers and our contemporaries, irrespective of
biological inheritance or apparent national or racial
community. Furthermore, very few are wholly innocent. Most
of us uondone or support evil institutions or public wrongs
of many sorts. The guilty suffer, too, though often
unawares. That is, their losses may be subtler, more
indirect, and seemingly slower to arrive, but arl deeper and
injure not so much their bodies as their minds and souls.

Regarding both innocent and guilty as parts of a great
organism, the innocent necessarily must suffer. Indeed,
their suffering is proof of the organic unity of humanity.
If they did not suffer, it would mean that they had no
connection with the rest of the species. Their suffering is
proof that the differences between all persons are not so
important as the unities and similarities.

In this aspect of the matter the difference between guilt
and innocence is relatively superficial. The common life,
the life of the species, is more important, and the prime
duty of the innocent is not toward securing

124

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

justice but toward restoring the moral health and
equilibrium of the entire human society all over the world.
I do not mean that those who suffer injustice should timidly
lie down under it, but that the aim of their non-violent
resistance should be more than justice. They cannot restore
the equilibrium of society by counterviolence but only by
resolute patience, love, kindly non-violent resistance and
voluntary suffering. Happily the very use of these
non-violent means will bring not only justice for themselves
but moral balance for society. Though they may not have
asked for it, the relatively innocent have the tough but
surpassingly important task of saving humanity.

In a moral realm such as the world of mankind, mistakes and
wrongs must necessarily be paid for and corrected. Because
the world is complex and constantly changing and some
people's lives are short, the payments and corrections are
not usually fully made by those who make the mistakes.
Whenever someone causes a frustration, it is paid for in
part by other persons.

But happily, because this is a moral world, if payment for
wrong is voluntarily undertaken by anyone, and nonviolent
suffering for it is assumed with love, the full payment does
not have to be made. It is, as it were, discounted. 1

Justice alone would seem to require full payment of every
moral debt. Justice deals with the mutual relations of the
elements of society. So does love. But love, as previously
explained, is more powerful because it also expresses the
forces of the whole. Thus, as compared with justice, love
brings more forces into the healing process and
re-establishes the moral equilibrium more rapidly and
easily. Without need for balancing off every separate wrong
by an equal separate right, love instead balances off part
of the wrongs by the forces of the whole. Therefore, loving
action, such as voluntary suffering with love for the sake
of principle, is never dissipated or lost. Sooner or later
it bears fruits. Gentle loving-kindness thus

PERSUASION

125

absorbs and counterbalances the extra energy of aggression.
By comparison with a struggle of mutual violence,
non-violent resistance enables the forces of the whole to
greatly reduce the destruction and losses and sufferings.

If we had to rely on justice alone to right the sum total of
all the mistakes and evils inherited from the past, as well
as those of the present, the situation would seem well nigh
hopeless. But non-violence and love can change our despair
to hope.

In most conflicts there is present in both parties the
desire to dominate. We may say that the prevailing concept
of human relationships involves dominance of one person and
subordination of the other. 1 5 This assumption prevails in
the family as between parents and children and as between
the older and younger children, in school as between teacher
and pupils, and in industry and agriculture as between
employer and employee. War is merely an application of this
same pattern in a critical situation between nations. People
accept wars because they do not see the possibility of any
other pattern of human relationships. In this framework of
relationships people are always very reluctant to alter
their status, their values, or their desires.

But non-violent resistance, plus kindness, offers an
entirely different pattern based not on dominance-submission
but on a relationship of integration. This is a relationship
that often exists momentarily and could be made permanent
and prevalent. This relationship is not a denial of
differences of qualities and function; it does not abolish
division of labour or differences of function. In this
relationship each party is in search of common purposes in
activities that are mutually satisfying to himself and
others. Each party is sure of his essential nature, shows
trust and expects trust, is eager for growth and aware that
growth means change in himself and his relationships, is
respectful of the personality of others, free from fear, and
eager for truth. Under such circumstances each person will
spontaneously yield when by so

126

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

doing he can promote the common purpose or win closer to the
truth. To promote this he will sacrifice himself for truth
and for the search for common purpose. He is willing to have
his actions and his vision tested by the actions, ideas and
values of other persons. The result of such interaction is
not compromise but growth and adaptation, a change of
character but no loss of personal integrity . 16 If there is
a loss or injury of possessions, there is an increase in
security. If there is a change in social status, it is an
improvement and realized as such by the person undergoing
it.

But it is no wonder that violent persons assume at first
that this method of non-violent resistance is merely crazy
and that non-violent resisters are as eager as anyone else
for dominance. The great age and wide prevalence of the
pattern of dominance on one side and submission on the other
blinds the violent person to the possibility of any other
sort of human relationship, to say nothing of his possible
ability to help create such a different relationship. He
feels that if he yields even a trifle, his opponent will
take advantage and try to dominate him and harm his
security, his social status, and his personal integrity.
Knowing also the energy of resentment against frustrations,
and more or less aware that his dominance causes
frustrations in other people, he fiBels the need of being
constantly on guard, a sense of constant uncertainty and
insecurity. The source of all attempts at dominance is this
deep sense of insecurity. To reduce the desire for dominance
this sense of insecurity must be relieved.

There are several elements in non-violent resistance which
tend to reduce in the violent opponent this feeling of
insecurity. Some of them are respect for personality, good
will, acts of kindness, adherence to truth, disciplined
order, a belief that human unity and underlying similarities
are more enduring and important than human differences, and
a steady series of deeds in accord with that belief.

PERSUASION

127

Another important factor in relieving the violent per\*
-son's sense of insecurity is the non-violent resister's
faithfulness to his method despite losses of property,
ph}'sical injury, imprisonment, or even death. Such proofs
â¢of sincerity are highly persuasive. If in time of crisis
the advocate of non-violence abandons that method and in
alleged necessary self-defence resorts to violence, the
onlookers and the violent opponent say, " Aha! He talked
pretty smoothly, but in a pinch he believes that you must
dominate or be dominated. We can't trust him. His talk of a
new system of human relationships is hypocritical bunk."

Where the non-violent resister is killed in the struggle,
his sincerity and devotion raise up others to support his
cause. This is proved by many instances, chief of which is
the continuance and spread of Christianity despite the
violent death of its founder. Admitting all the failures of
the churches, there are still enough real followers of
Christ to make this statement true. The vitality of
mon-violent resistance enables its trust-promoting qualities
to endure and the repetition of stimuli to be prolonged.
Even in the extreme case, and indeed because of the extreme
case, the sense of insecurity in the violent party is
velieved. Then dominance seems less necessary and the first
steps of creating the new set of relationships can be begun.
When that new framework can be gradually institutionalized
the desire for dominance, except in abnormal persons, will
be gone.

The dominance of some people is often called forth fby an
unwillingness in many to accept and exercise responsibility,
and by a desire of others to be dominated. Certain people,
perhaps because of lack of energy, prefer to acquire
self-respect and give dignity to their ego not by their own
exertions but by some mode of subordinate .association or
identification, often only fanciful, with those whom they
consider great or with a big corporation or ,r powerful
government. Some subordination grows out Â«of political or
economic ignorance.

128

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

Inwall these instances the dominance of the rulers is a
resultant of the weakness of the masses. Non-violent
resistance and its discipline tends to remove such
weaknesses among those who practice it. Therefore, in that
respect, also, it weakens the dominance of those in power.

In regard to the desire to dominate, I would distinguish the
instances where the violently dominating person, or group,
has a bona fide ability for management and administration.
There certainly are such people, born with a keen ability to
understand human relationships and a capacity for organizing
and stimulating people to joint endeavours . 17 Such a
talent is of much social value, provided it is exercised
without pride, selfishness, or coercion, and in a sincere
and pure spirit of service. It would be a grave mistake to
completely deprive such pople of an opportunity to function
just because many of them have warped the situation to their
own advantage and have used violence. I would therefore be
quite willing to allow such talented people to stand for
office and be chosen by democratic process to act as
executives, provided they are subject to the veto power of
well trained non-violent resistance of those whose affairs
they may administer.

To such persons the non-violent resisters could wisely say
in effect, "We do not seek to deprive you of your true
status and function, but merely to get you to purge yourself
of the desire to dominate and coerce us. If you will truly
serve the people unselfishly and honestly and without
coercion we will be glad to have you exercise your undoubted
talents." When once that understanding got home, the energy
of skilled administrators who also are sincere would in many
cases leave the road of selfishness and violence and seek a
satisfactory settlement. Their essential social status being
made secure, they would perhaps be more willing to yield up
their former privileges and adapt themselves to a new
situation.

The combination of this pattern of dominance-submission and
the relation between frustration and aggression makes it
clear why violence does not solve any

/

PERSUASION 129

conflicts. It may change their form but it does not end
them. Violence ends in the frustration of the defeated
party. Because the energy of emotion, intellect, and will is
persistent, frustration inevitably creates some sort of
subsequent aggression, perhaps against someone else. That
causes another outburst of violence, ending in another
frustration, and so to endless waste, cruelty, suffering,
and loss. The vicious circle can be broken only by
indomitable patience, non-violent resistance, and kindness.
The price is high, but very much less than that of violence.

Often another obstacle for non-violent resistance to
overcome is what may be called the opponent's dual loyalty,
his loyalty to standards of personal morality and his
loyalty to his group whether that group be a society, a
corporation, a social class, a government, a nation, or an
unorganized race. Often these two loyalties clash because of
a conflict between the moral codes and purposes of the
group. 18 This conflict may be severe enough almost to
constitute a kind of schizophrenia. It is probably one of
the causative factors in the enormous amount of mental
disease in the modern world.

Out of a sense of duty to the nation a man who in private
life has the highest standards of rectitude, will in his
capacity as a government official or diplomat, publicly and
emphatically tell a lie. There was a famous example of this
during the First World War when Sir Edward Grey, then
Secretary of State for Great Britain, in a speech to
Parliament denied the existence of the secret treaties with
Russia and France which he himself had taken part in making
and which were revealed to the world later when the
Bolsheviks siezed power in Russia. In the same way many
officers of large industrial corporations in controversies
with labour unions will, out of loyalty to what they believe
to be the interests of the corporation, engage in deceit and
violence which would be utterly foreign to them in their
personal relationships.

P-9

130

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

Because of this dual loyalty, non-violent resisters to such
an organization's policies will find men of fine personal
character as the leaders of their opponents ordering or
acquiescing in acts of atrocious injustice or cruelty, and
seemingly adamant against appeals to human decency.

Continued non-violent resistance overcomes this difficulty
in two ways. It gradually clarifies the relation between
means and ends. It leads opponents who have come to think of
the existence and habitual functioning of their organization
as so important that it is an end in itself, to realize that
their organization originally was and still is only a means
to a finer and greater end. That realization may lead them
to see that the organization, or its accustomed modes of
action, can be altered so as to accomplish better the finer
end. Again, non-violent resistance, in ways that are not yet
clear not only solves cases of opposition and conflict
between two persons, or two groups, but also integrates the
different levels or compartments into which modern secular
men have divided their lives. This process takes place in
both the nonviolent resister and his violent opponent. If
the violent opponent out of loyalty to his organization is
doing acts inconsistent with personal morality, the gradual
increase of integration within him will enable him somehow
to resolve that inconsistency and bring the organization's
moral code closer in line with personal morality.

Sentiments play a great part in the affairs of all people.
From all the discussions in previous chapters it is not
difficult to see that non-violent resistance plus
friendliness can alter the sentiments which control the
opponent. Some sociologists think that sentiments change so
exceedingly slowly that for any person to make persistent
attempt to change the sentiments of others is a mark of
immaturity or stupidity. Yet who would deny that Buddha,
Plato, Jesus Christ, Muhammad, Martin Luther, Galileo,
Newton, Gandhi and Sun'Yat Sen altered the sentiments of
millions? And who would accuse these

PERSUASION

131

men of immaturity? The last twenty-five years have seen a
great development of the sentiments of nationality and
patriotism among the hundreds of millions of China and
India. Sentiments can be altered, and modern psychology has
indicated some of the ways.

The reluctance of people to change their habits of thought,
feeling, and action is a form of inertia which is another
obstacle for non-violent resistance to overcome. The longer
the habit has continued, the harder it is to change.

A part of the strength of habit lies in the fact that in
habit there is an element of pattern, partly intellectual,
partly of sentiment, partly of will and action. One of the
greatest aids to change of habit is, then, a change of
intellectual pattern. By its stimulus to the imagination of
the opponent, non-violent resistance causes such a change of
pattern and thus brings about the desired change of habit.
The greater significance and moral beauty in the pattern of
non-violent resistance aid its ability to alter other
habits.

In some instances the non-violent resister may have to
struggle against a person or group of persons afflicted with
real megalomania or even paranoia. In such cases the only
successful treatment by psychiatry has been by means of
steady friendliness, non-violence, working from an area of
clear perception in the patient to a clear understanding of
his error and a better knowledge of himself. Non-violent
resistance is a sort of " field psychiatry It takes time and
involves suffering by the non-violent party. But the method
is effective and creative, and it is the only method that is
effective . 19

Since the assumptions of people in conflict are usually
different, and also control conduct, probably no conflict
can be permanently solved unless the pertinent assumptions
of one or both parties are changed. The change may or may
not require recognition, explicit formulation, and
acknowledgement of the assumptions. But changing

132 THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

another person's assumptions is an important part of
persuasion, of changing the heart of an opponent.

A person's assumptions lie very deep. They exist prior to
any reasoning. They cannot be either proved or disproved by
logic. They precede explicit beliefs. Like the axioms in
geometry or the rules in a game, they are at the basis of
all of a person's actions and govern their character and
direction. Sometimes a person is occasionally and dimly
aware of his assumptions; more often he is wholly
unconscious of them. Some assumptions are relative,
depending on still deeper assumptions; others are absolute.

The search for one's assumptions, whether made by oneself or
someone else, requires keen discrimination, honesty,
disinterestedness, and close thinking. It is disquieting.
The more nearly absolute the assumption, the more does one
usually dislike the search. Dragging up roots is painful. To
have to face one's own assumptions in the clear light of
full consciousness brings out so many unforeseen
implications that the sudden revelation is often startling.
Sometimes inconsistencies appear that are most
uncomfortable. The sudden demand for thinking out all the
implications and interconnections and inconsistencies call
for more time and energy than one is willing to devote. It
is felt as a strain. It may even involve humiliation.

Since assumptions lie so deep, it is hard to see how they
can be changed. One thing that makes change in them possible
is the fact that assumptions do not exist singly and
separately either in a person or in a civilization.
Assumptions exist, as it were, in constellations. In such a
constellation some assumptions are dominant, others are
recessive. The elements are not entirely consistent or
harmonious. The constellations are therefore not in perfect
equilibrium but in a more or less unstable state of strain
or tension. 2 \^

Non-violent resistance is a deep, thorough and persistent
search for truth. It operates both in the conscious

PERSUASION

133

mind and also in the imagination and subconsciousness. It
permeates all areas of the lives of both opponents. This
search therefore tests assumptions, and if some of them are
mistaken the strain upon them is increased. Presently,
because of the unstable equilibrium plus the new strain, the
constellation has to alter, and with that comes an
alteration in the mistaken assumption. The process takes
time, but in persuasion such alterations are of great
importance.

There is probably one other way in which assumptions are
altered. When remarkable results are obtained by a new
method, people are compelled to re-examine all the thinking
that went into the previous methods, and sometimes to carry
their analysis clear back to their prior assumptions and
revise them. The careful and precise use of the inductive
method of logic in science produced such notable results
that thinkers all over the western world changed many of
their former assumptions. So, after considerable victories
have been won by non-violent resistance, those who have lost
those struggles will be likely to modify their prior
assumptions . 21

Xnterracial conflicts are another obstacle which nonviolent
resistance will meet. They are complex. In part they are
economic or " class " phenomena, in part political, in part
social. They involve all of the obstacles already discussed;
mistaken assumptions, fear of strangers, pride,
possessiveness, cruelty, desire to dominate, frustration and
aggression, habit, and dual loyalty. This very complexity,
however, serves to emphasize the utter futility and
stupidity of using violence as a solution. That method can
produce nothing but more violence and ultimately destruction
of all the different civilizations and their total freight
of human values. While the complexity indicates that the
solutions will require great patience and forbearance and
will necessarily be slow, nevertheless the only means of
solution are love and non-violent resistance.

Some people stand aghast at the thoroughness of the
discipline of certain aggressor nations or classes, and
think

134

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

that such a factor could not be overcome by non-violent
resistance. The answer is that it is possible and not too
difficult for the believers in non-violence to devise and
practice a discipline which is still more thorough and
profound, still more in accord with a wider range of subtle
powers, and therefore still more powerful than the
discipline of those aggressor nations.

Some people do not see how non-violent resistance could
possibly be effective against bombing from the air. Usually
such bombing has not and would not be used unless the people
of the bombed places had themselves used violence. Such
bombing does not last indefinitely. It is followed by some
sort of contact and parley. At that time the elements of
non-violence begin to operate. The continuance of life in
Malta, Chungking, Hamburg, and Berlin is evidence that such
bombing does not end all resistance.

There is not space here to discuss every possible kind of
opposition that may be met in an opponent to nonviolence.
But the foregoing are perhaps the main types. There are in
non-violence more elements of strength than we yet know. The
discussion will perhaps serve to reassure the doubters of
the persuasive power of nonviolence and thus lead them to
try it.

But there is yet another kind of obstacle which nonviolent
resisters will meet and must overcome. It resides not in
their opponents but in themselves. It is made up of the
inconsistencies, temptations, and corruptions which beset
non-violent resisters, also their attachment to certain
habits and institutions which are inconsistent with
non-violence. These resisters are all common human clay and
subject to defects. The overcoming of these defects is part
of the function of training and discipline and will be
discussed in a subsequent chapter.

Lastly, we should realize that we must learn how to persuade
not only our active opponents but also those who are
indifferent, those who are curious spectators, and our
children and ourselves. For all these kinds of persuasion

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

135

we need a thorough understanding of the method of
nonviolence and its working and its disciplines. We must
know what are the methods and disciplines and how and why
they work.

CHAPTER X

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

For various reasons many people see no necessity for
training for non-violent resistance. Many are even rebelled
by the idea. Some think that such training would produce
unpleasant self-consciousness or even insincerity and smug
self-righteousness. Others think it liable to lead to
dogmatism and fanaticism. Some see it resulting in loss of
initiative, dreary uniformity, or boredom. Still other are
made vaguely uncomfortable by the idea without being able to
define the reason. These various objections will be dealt
with during the discussion.

While any course of action or inaction, if unwisely pursued,
has dangers, that is no reason for holding off from useful
action. Let us see some reasons why training in this matter
is useful.

The general environment and herd pressure are powerful,
constant influences upon every one of us. They will
assuredly bend and mould us into the prevailing pattern
unless we take specific measures and make special efforts to
do otherwise. Non-violent resistance is different from the
usual course of conduct and different from our primitive
reactions. It will therefore require efforts specially
designed. Regular training is a specially designed and
specially potent factor of one's environment. If military
conscription should become permanent, then unless we choose
for ourselves and our children a different type of training,
we should all be disciplined into the military mould and
compelled to fight.

All of us are creatures of habit. Habits are necessary in
order to save energy and enable us to use our minds. If I
had to direct consciously every muscle in

136

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

my legs to act in right tension and right sequence all the
time I was walking, I would hardly have time enough even to
steer in a certain direction, to say nothing of planning
what to do when I got to my destination. The time I spent
while a baby learning how to walk, getting those muscles
trained to habitual action, was well spent. If I am active I
have one kind of habits; if lazy I have another kind. Always
I have some sort of habits. Hence I must choose which kind
of habits I will have; and, having chosen, I must then
subject myself to the process of learning, of habit
formation, that will produce that particular kind of
habitual action. Non-violent resistance of a sporadic sort
would accomplish almost nothing more than to give us a
reputation for freakishness and unreliability. To be
effective it must be habitual. To establish such a new habit
calls for a somewhat prolonged process of habit formation.

If you care about non-violence and want to have it become
effective either in your own personal relationships or over
a larger area, you must put energy into your concept of it
and make it live. This involves making it a way of living
and requires habit forming.

We have seen that growth of all kinds requires many
repetitions of slight stimuli. This is another way of
describing one important aspect of the learning process,
that is to say, of training.

Because in the modern world our moral relationships are
often complex and confusing very few people can instantly
think, in many events involving conflict, just what is the
right thing to do. Therefore, previous training in an
effective way of solving conflicts would be a great help. As
Gerald Heard has pointed out, at the instant when action is
demanded of us we do not have time to think through the
whole situation, and so we act according to our assumptions,
our sentiments, and our habits. Hence, if you prefer a
certain kind of action it is wise to prepare in advance the
sentiments and habits that will automatically produce that
kind of action.

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

137

We have learned in the previous chapter that frustrations
cause resentment, and that the energy of accumulated
resentments may last for years and usually results in
aggression or anger in some form. Since we all have had
countless frustrations during our lives, we all are in
danger of acting aggressively under provocation, be it ever
so slight. Our self-control is therefore weak. But if we
would like always to act gently, we must somehow reduce this
pent-up reservoir of aggressive tendencies. A course of
training which, among other things, would automatically
reduce this store of trouble-making energy would produce
conduct much nearer to what we desire.

The self-control involved in non-violent resistance is a
kind of skill, a skill not only in a method of persuasion
but in a way of living. Getting any skill requires training
and practice, first in its details and finally in the
entirety.

At this point let us consider the alleged dangers of
training for non-violent resistance. Take the fear that it
would lead to priggishness or insincerity. Can that fear be
based on the idea that learning an effective method of
handling conflicts is morally dangerous to those who use it
?

Resort to the courts is one mode of handling conflicts, but
nobody hesitates to study law because it might make him
priggish or insincere. Personal violence is another mode of
dealing with conflict, but nobody refrains from learning to
box or to wrestle or to shoot for fear of becoming smug. W 7
ar is yet another method of handling large scale conflict,
but nobody dreads the study of military science lest it make
him self-righteous. It is true that non-violent resistance
may require endurance of suffering, loss of property, or
even death, but so also may the use of force. Non-violent
resistance endeavours to influence other people
intellectually and morally, but so also do politics and the
arts and sciences of child care, education, and psychiatry.
Nobody considers those studies likely to make a person
morally unpleasant.

138

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

Let nobody think that acquiring skill in non-violent
resistance results in superficial actions which do not grow
naturally and truly out of an inner condition, hence
resulting in hypocrisy. The changes induced by the training,
just as in military training, alter the source of the
responses as well as the responses themselves. Of course, if
one does not understand the need for training and the
reasons for and results of each detail in the training, it
may become a meaningless ritual, and one then may become
insincere. But that can happen in any
discipline---scientific, religious, aesthetic, or
military---and is due not to the discipline itself but to
the narrowness or forgetfulness of the teacher.

Again, let nobody think that acquiring skill in nonviolent
resistance is becoming saintly. Formerly nonviolence was
practised only by saints, but it is no longer so limited.
The invention of a discipline has changed that. A discipline
is like a tool. Tools, whether tangible or intangible, make
it possible for ordinary men to do what formerly was
possible only to men of very unusual skill, strength, or
intellect. The mould-board plough, for example, made it
possible for every farmer to cultivate even more land than
formerly a very skilled and powerful man could do. A
thousand years ago very few people could read or do
geometrical problems. The invention of printing plus
institutionalized public education made it possible for
practically everyone both to read and to develop skill in
geometry. Military discipline, another kind of tool, changes
men of indifferent courage into heroes. So the invention by
Gandhi of a discipline for non-violent resisters made the
thing possible for hundreds of thousands of Indian peasants
who were not saints but ordinary people. Hence, if now a
person decides to undergo training for non-violence, he is
not priggishly announcing that he is going to be a saint,
nor should anyone attribute to him that intention or
attitude.

.. A person does not create moral power. It comes to him
only after he has complied with certain principles.

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

139

This complying enables him to tap the spiritual power
pervading the entire world, just as one by suitable
connections and switches can tap an electric current from a
power circuit. Spiritual power then manifests itself in that
person in the mode of moral power. The moral power is
created by the spiritual power, not by the person who makes
the contact, just as electric light is created not by the
bulb but by the current which flows through it. So if a
person becomes proud of having moral power, his
understanding of the situation is badly mistaken. If a
person were to get smug over training to become nonviolent,
he would be so mistaken about the whole matter that under
provocation he would fail and would probably become violent.

Non-violent resistance is a more intelligent mode of conduct
than violence, but to become proud about learning to be more
intelligent in human relationships would betray immaturity
and would itself be unintelligent. If, despite these
considerations, some persons get priggish or proud because
they are learning or have learned to use non-violent
resistance habitually, it means not that the training for
such skill is at fault but probably that they themselves
have a tendency to that personal weakness. Perhaps the dread
of acquiring such unpleasant traits through such a course of
training is an expression of the prevailing secularism which
puts moral relationships into a separate compartment of
life.

It is true that a certain type of training might cause
dogmatism or fanaticism. But that would not be peculiar to
non-violence. It could happen in training for law, theology,
medicine, engineering, or warfare. It would come not from
the end toward which the training is directed, but from the
manner of its presentation. Hence the objection can be
postponed until you see or experience the discipline itself.
The same considerations apply to three other alleged
dangers---unpleasant uniformity, reduction of initiative,
and boredom.

140

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

An objection has been raised that any definite kind of
discipline would cause trouble because no two people would
understand the same thing by such terms as discipline. But
such semantic difficulties exist in all education and have
to be lived through.

Some people shy away from this proposed discipline because
the very idea of trying to mould one's own character makes
them feel self-conscious and awkward. But they should not
feel any more self-consciousness than a business man who
puts a good rug and a mahogany desk in his office to remind
himself and his callers, by recurring daily stimuli, that he
has money and power; or than church members who build their
church in Gothic style so as to inspire feelings of awe and
reverence among themselves and others who enter; or than a
mother who by providing curtains, rugs, and wall paper of
harmonious colours and designs gives constant stimuli of
beauty and serenity to her family. Deliberately and
regularly subjecting oneself to stimuli chosen for a
specific purpose should not make any sensible person feel
foolish. We should be as objective about the training of our
instincts, emotions and sentiments as we are about the
training of our muscles.

Some may think that discipline and its resultant habits are
incompatible with freedom. That is not so. The original
decision to undergo discipline must be voluntary and without
coercion. But without self-discipline and good habits nobody
can have a sound character or achieve anything worth while.
Even the wind, the very symbol of complete freedom, is at
all times subject to the limitations and laws of
aero-dynamics, of thermo-dynamics, of gravity, and other
physical laws. There can be no human freedom without strict
and habitual adherence to moral and intellectual principles.

Any other objections too vague to define are perhaps due
only to dislike of changing one'& comfortable routine, to
fear of being thought queer, or to irrational suspicion

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

141

of anything that is new. People with such qualms will have
to experience more suffering and do more thinking.

Since belief grows out of experience and usually requires
many repetitions of the experience, we need, in order to
become deeply and enduringly convinced of the validity of
non-violence, to deliberately put ourselves in the way of
using the method in all the small conflicts and frictions of
daily existence, experiencing the reaction of other people
to what we have done, comparing the results, and pondering
over the matter. It is like a laboratory course in some
science, or like the practice necessary to learn any art.

Each of us has some habits that are bad or at least
inconsistent with non-violence. One way to end unwanted
habits is to deprive them of their source of energy. This
piay be done by introducing competitive desirable habit
formers alongside the old habits and paying special
attention to the cultivation of the new habits. It is
important that the new habits should have in them clearer
pattern and more realized significance than the old habits.
This extra pattern and significance constantly attracts the
attention and imagination and thus eases the substitution.
Our human nature is so blind and stubborn, we deceive
ourselves so easily and constantly, our inheritance is so
complex and unknown, and we are so ignorant of our true
nature, that we must have training to purify and guide
ourselves.

One important element and necessary accompaniment of
successful non-violent resistance is the sentiment called
love. Note that love is not an emotion. It is a sentiment, a
specific organization of many emotions and 'many ideas. Love
grows \* out of a realization of human unity. If the ideas
involved in that concept are pondered for long, the
appropriate emotions follow. Love is the subtlest, most
developed, most inclusive, most enduring, and most powerful
of all the sentiments. Its cultivation requires the greatest
energy and the most

142

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

delicate and complete organization of idea and emotion. It
requires steady, prolonged, purposeful thought and effort.
To cultivate love requires a thorough course of
self-discipline.

Of all the many different theories of the will which I have
been able to study, by far the most interesting and, in my
estimation, most probably correct is that of Luria, perhaps
modified by an element called " identification " in the
theory of Aveling. 1 Luria's theory is based on an immense
number of most ingenious objective experiments. According to
Luria's theory, a person controls his behaviour not by "
will power " but by following a pattern of external and
internal stimuli which mobilize, organize, and direct the
reactions of his instincts, emotions, desires, sentiments,
and other natural forces of behaviour. The control is always
by such indirect means. The stimuli may include such
elements as speech, rhythms, tangible tools, work, stories,
music, symbols, and signs. The pattern needs to be
elaborated in such clear detail and sequence that the person
(according to the suggestion made by Aveling) readily sees
himself able to come under the successive stimuli, finds
them interesting, sees their relation to the goal and so
wants not only the goal but also the series of stimuli. Such
a pattern is provided by a course of training. A discipline
is such a pattern. By following it the will is built up and
self-control of behaviour is secured.

In his book on Adventures of Ideas the philosopher A. N.
Whitehead pointed out the long lag that usually exists
between the discovery or first statement of an idea and
putting it into action.2 Lancelot Hogben in his M he matics
for the Mi lion 3 gives several instances of that sort, one
of which was the germ idea of logarithms, which was
mentioned by Archimedes two centuries before the birth of
Christ, but the idea was not made practical till many
centuries later when Napier worked out tables of logarithms
for the use of rapidly expanding navigation.

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

143

Hogben thinks that an idea is put into practical action only
when there is a strongly felt social need for it. Probably
that is so. But in addition to that condition, the gap
between idea and action is bridged, I think, only when the
idea is given detailed structure in space and a patterned
sequence of elaborated detail in time. It is like the
invention of a tool and the motions by which the tool is
used.

Men do not learn to improve their relationships by study of
history. They make an advance only when exIDerience,
thought, and imagination have eventually crystallized ih the
invention of a tool. The tool may be material, like a
plough, or immaterial, like a concept, a symbol, or an
alphabet. A material tool acts on the environment; an
immaterial tool acts on man's own inner character and thus
helps control his behaviour. The regular use of such a tool
creates an advance without any further effort specifically
aimed at such improvement.

An illustration of the gap between the birth of an idea and
its practical utilization, is the history of the idea of
non-violent resistance. It was first propounded in India and
China, certainly as far back as 500 B.C., and perhaps even
1000 B.C. or more. Christ re-emphasized it. The early
Christians used it chiefly as individuals. But in organized
group form it was not used till many centuries later, and
never on a very large scale before Gandhi. There is now a
strongly felt social need for this idea in practice. One
reason for Gandhi's success is that he devised a specific
discipline for the movement. This discipline is the way by
which the idea is given structure in space and a
corresponding sequence of detail in time. The discipline is
then, like military discipline, an intangible tool. It makes
the idea effective. Steady use of this tool will make a vast
improvement in human relationships.

Since, by virtue of the principle of stimulus and response,
non-violent resistance will usually have to be many times
repeated, it will require courage, a strong

144

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

â¢

sense of human unity, patience, ability to sacrifice oneself
for a cause, ability to endure suffering alone, and to
endure apparent failure and come at the obstacle again. By a
course of training all these can be cultivated.

; In order to bring up children into the way of non-violence
there must be provided a special mode of family life and
training during the formative years. This must be such as
will reduce frustrations to a minimum and provide prompt and
satisfying outlets for the energy of such frustrations . 4
The child must always have an environment of steady
affection and firm guidance.

If non-violent policies and practices are eventually to
control society, the non-violent people must first show that
the combination of inner harmony and order with outer order
is better and more enduring than the mere exterior order
imposed by violence and threats of violence. Non-violent
people must prove themselves capable of maintaining social
order. Not till then will society fully trust the method.
Perhaps the prime doubt among the sceptics of non-violent
resistance and love is whether that combination could really
create and maintain public order. Demonstration of its
actual ability in this respect will be powerfully
persuasive. Non-violent people must maintain order first
among themselves, and make order one of their outstanding
characteristics. They must establish it in all their
enterprises. This requires suitable habits, and that means
discipline.

When non-violent people have acquired the cohesion and moral
power that come out of deep and fine discipline, they can
take Â©ver from the Government its present power of
initiative.

Without discipline, that is to say, a mode of habit
formation and maintenance, a group cannot win power. And
without a great increase in group power you cannot attain or
keep for long any social, political, or economic reforms.
Mere education or organization will not permanently secure
any reforms. They might be attained for a brief time without
discipline, but the ruling group would

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

145

end them as soon as a big economic crisis or war should
come. For example, look at what happened in Europe between
1920 and 1940. Reforms will come to stay only if the masses
acquire and retain the ability to make a firm veto by mass
non-violent resistance. This holds true for such proposals
as the single tax, socialism, social credit, other money
reforms, better education, abolition of war,
decentralization, co-operation, abolition of interracial
discrimination, industrial democracy, or whatever other
reform you may desire. Hence, reformers would be wise to lay
less stress upon advocacy of their special changes and
concentrate on the teaching of non-violent resistance. Once
that tool is mastered, we can make all sorts of permanent
reforms.

If you want democracy or liberty you must have mutual
respect and toleration under all circumstances. Mutual
respect and toleration can be attained only if in all
relations non-violence prevails. We cannot have nonviolence
a dominant feature of social, political, and industrial life
without widespread propaganda and training. Hence, true and
widespread democracy and liberty require training in
non-violence.

Sooner or later some non-violent resisters will find
themselves condemned to prison. To endure imprisonment
successfully, and all the cruelty that goes with it, will
need previous firm discipline.

All great military leaders and authorities on the art and
science of war declare that the main strength of armies is
their discipline. It is more important even than weapons.
Sooner or later non-violent resisters organized in any
considerable number will have to meet the armed might of the
state. In order to meet disciplined troops and win against
them, the non-violent resisters must have a discipline which
is more thorough, deeper, more moral, and more effective
than military discipline.

If a person wants to do anything that is socially
valuable---for instance, to become a physician, a farmer, a
dietician, or a mechanic---he cheerfully undergoes

P-10

146

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

several years of training, during which he learns a specific
skill and in that respect learns to think more exactly than
other people. If he really cares for his occupation, he
keeps on training himself all the rest of his life. In that
way he succeeds. The moral is obvious for believers in
non-violence. .

Unless each one of us becomes more self-controlled and
skilled in human relationships, is it not vain to hope for a
better world? Does each one of us expect to stay just as he
is and have all the self-improvement made by other people ?
Is all the wrong somebody else's fault? Should everybody
blame somebody else? Should everybody " pass the buck "? If
we believers in non-violence refuse to change our habits in
thorough fashion, that is, refuse to undergo discipline, the
refusal would imply that in any conflict in which we become
involved, we think the opponent is entirely in the wrong and
is the only one who must change. Since we all make mistakes
and do wrong things, the wrongs are never entirely on the
part of the opponent. But even if in any particular conflict
all the changing must be done by the opponent, to announce
an assumption like that in advance would not be persuasive.
A" holier than thou " attitude is always irritating and bad
tactics. We who believe in non-violence must change our
habits before we ask an opponent to change his.

Again, if we believers in non-violence decline to change our
habits, the refusal indicates that we think we can win any
struggle very easily. That is a silly miscalculation. He who
makes it will practically always be defeated.

In human affairs all great changes are the result of the
influence of persons on persons or of groups on groups, or
rather of persons embodying one set of ideas on persons
embodying another set of ideas. Before a person can
influence or change another person, he must, unless a born
genius, first change himself. This, of course, is true also
as between groups. Marxians profess to believe that the

THE NEED FOR TRAINING

147

only important formative human influence is that of
institutions, and that our efforts must be devoted entirely
to changing our institutions. But the Communists in Russia
took good care to kill the Czar, and the Stalinists drove
Trotsky clear to Mexico and finally killed him there and
then " purged " and executed a number of other former party
leaders. By so doing these prominent Marxians thereby
admitted the primary influential power of disciplined
individual persons. Institutions are group habits of
persons. Before there can be institutions there must be
individual persons. A change of character or of abilities
can be secured only by training and change of habits. Newton
influenced other men of science only after, by hard work, he
had altered his own concepts of the mechanics of the solar
system. Lenin influenced other people only after a long
period of thinking and self-discipline. That is true of
every influential person in all history, also of every
influential organization. Hence non-violent resisters in
order to alter opponents must first subject themselves to
self-discipline.

A person who has non-violence as one of his ideals, unless
he also practices a discipline for it, will, if his country
is attacked, usually end by supporting the war. This has
happened to many highly intelligent pacifists such as
Einstein, Bertrand Russell, and A. A. Milne. The reasons for
this may be (a) that without considerable discipline his
assumptions, sentiments, and habits of thought will not have
changed enough to keep him steady, and so he succumbs to the
herd pressure; or (b) that he fails to realize that order
and liberty are not entities in their own right but are
by-products of deeper conditions; or (c) he really values
certain institutions more than human life. So he resigns
himself to the old method of violence.

Most of the failures of campaigns of non-violent resistance
have been due to inadequate discipline. This is true of many
industrial strikes and of the struggles in India. In the
campaigns of 1921, 1930, and 1942 the great

148 THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

majority of Indian National Congressmen disregarded Gandhi's
pleas for discipline. Those who desire success with
non-violent resistance in any struggle had better undergo
careful and prolonged discipline beforehand.

The practical effectiveness of pacifism may justifiably be
doubted until the movement as a whole adopts and practises
an adequate discipline.

Since the innocent common people always suffer for the
mistakes and greeds of their rulers, political or economic,
it is up to the innocent to control their rulers. Public
affairs are so complex, the scale of political organization
is so great, and daily work is so absorbing and pressing
that the common man has no time to examine all proposals,
make decisions, and lead in public affairs. He must delegate
all that to specialists. And because of the inevitable
poison of power, such delegates often become selfish or
corrupt. Propaganda is pervasive and bewildering, and the
machinery of voting and representation is so complex and
warped that real control by the people in matters of
ultimate power is by that machinery nearly impossible. The
only power left to the people is the power of veto, and in
ultimate matters that can be exercised effectively only by
mass non-violent resistance. Hence the people must
thoroughly learn this method.

Some religious organizations may feel that their present
type of training is sufficient to produce effective
nonviolent resisters. If that were true, those organizations
would have been far more influential and the method would be
far more widespread and effective than it actually has been.

Because the assumptions, sentiments, concepts, and habits of
large numbers of people change so gradually, the building of
a non-violent civilization would, under the most favourable
circumstances, require at least three generations. Those who
have such a hope must establish a kind of training that can
spread and last that long and develop into a permanent
institution.

TRAINING

149

After the present war is what is conventionally called "
over " or " ended ", the reverbations of it and other
long-standing and unresolved conflicts will create
widespread changes, civil violence, difficult frictions and
probably minor wars for years to come. To maintain as much
as islands of social order in such circumstances will
require love and thorough non-violence and hence intensive
training.

For eventual success we shall need great leaders. If we can
develop a widespread belief in the power of nonviolence and
some sort of effective mass discipline and practise,
presently out of the large number of faithful people thereby
developed, there will arise an adequate number and
succession of great leaders.

CHAPTER XI

TRAINING

As training for non-violent resistance has been discussed in
a number of pamphlets , 1 and as the size of this volume is
limited, this chapter is brief. More space is given to other
aspects of the subject.

Obviously the nature of the training will depend on the
purpose for which it is to be used. The purpose is more than
merely to enable people, after war has become imminent or
actually has begun, to refuse to fight. To end war we must
do more than that. We must remove its complex of causes and
its supports. War is an inherent, inevitable, and essential
element of the civilization in which we live because it is
the final large-scale flowering of the domination or
violence which almost all the time permeates all our human
relationships. Hence our aim can be nothing short of
building an entirely new civilization in which domination
and violence of all kinds play a small and steadily
decreasing part. We must change non-violently and deeply the
motives, functions, and institutions of our whole culture .
2 This is indeed a task to stir people's imaginations and
energies.

150

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

The training to develop people who can bring about such
changes must be broad and deep. As the means to such an end
it must be wholly consistent with the nature of the end. In
various aspects it must be adaptable to both men and women,
to children, adolescents and adults, to people of different
kinds and degrees of education and of different occupations.
It must give immediate satisfactions as well as prepare for
the future. It must give a sense of creative activity and
developing power. It must involve the exercise of our whole
nature, our bodies, minds, and souls---all our senses,
emotions, sentiments, will, thoughts, and ideals. It must
conform with metaphysical truth or principles. It should be
not rigid but capable of wide variation to suit different
natures and to permit the exercise of initiative. It should
be adaptable to conditions of either freedom or governmental
repression. Parts of it must be practised individually, more
of it socially. The social part should be designed in one
form for families, in another form for small non-family
groups numbering not over twelve, and in yet another form
for all larger groups. Some features must be sheer good fun;
all parts must be interesting and significant. So far as
possible, those who take part should understand in relation
to the main purpose the reasons and effects of everything
they do. The different kinds of training should be practised
regularly at frequent intervals---most of them at least once
a week, some of them daily, a few of them annually.

In general I would recommend the following types of activity
:

1.  Reading and discussion.

2.  Inspiration or culture of sentiments.

3.  Music, preferably group singing.

4.  Manual work.

5.  Silent meditation.

6.  Social service.

7.  Practise of non-violence in small matters at all times.

TRAINING

151

8.  In the thinking, culture of sentiments, and medi tation,
    care should be taken to try to get rid of ideas,
    sentiments, emotions and assumptions which are divisive
    and inconsistent with non-violence and its practise.

Plenty of such training would develop a strong, vivid, and
enduring sense of unity with all mankind, and faith in the
possibilities for good in all people. It would generate
self-respect, respect for others, self-reliance,
selfconfidence, self-control, self-sacrifice for a fine
ideal. It would promote loyalty, tenacity, and steadiness of
purpose. Such activities, if habitual, would foster ability
to endure hardship for a common cause, and awareness of
effective order and co-operation in working toward an end
greater than any individual. They would create energy and
courage. They would build tolerance and non-violence. They
would develop equanimity and poise, patience, humility and
love of truth. Training of this sort would promote, we
believe, a tender-hearted kindness and love of people, which
are indispensable. It would engender a strong desire for a
fine social order and an ability to create and maintain it.
It would help establish faith in God or induce an
intellectual analysis of one's premises until one is
consciously and clearly aware that one's deepest and most
inclusive assumption is a unity that underlies not only all
external forms and phenomena but also the entire inner world
of man.

The reading may be individual and include study of articles,
pamphlets, and books dealing with non-violence, peace,
comparative cultures or civilizations, and the nature of
man. Or there may be reading aloud in groups with subsequent
discussion, or lectures or talks followed by questions and
discussion. Groups may also use debates and round-table
discussions. Such discursive thinking gives stimulating
ideas and clear understanding, thus aiding the will and
making action surer, swifter, more effective, and more
enduring. It gives the interest of wrestling with important
and immediate social problems.

152

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

The particular sentiments that should be cultivated have
been previously mentioned. The culture of sentiments is
aided by the discursive thinking already mentioned, also by
seeing suitable drama. Group singing, folk dancing, eating
meals together, and going on walks in groups, all create a
strong sense of unity. Hearing stories of the lives and
deeds of great exemplars of nonviolence is important, not
only for the development of desirable sentiments, but also
for strengthening the will. Manual work and social service
do much to complete and strengthen the organization of
emotions and ideas which together constitute sentiments.
Periodical commemorative celebrations, parades, ceremonies,
and large meetings with addresses are also inspiring.

Music is a subtle influence but very powerful. It stirs our
emotions, helps us somehow to understand our emotions,
stimulates the imagination, and enriches the consciousness.
Group singing gives self-assurance, vigour, unity,
tolerance, and a sense of equality. It creates happiness,
love of beauty, and a sense of making a significant
contribution to a social group. Group singing releases and
sublimates the energy of pent-up resentments or bitterness
caused by frustration, injustice, or wrong, and helps to
solve inner conflicts. It symbolizes and expresses feelings
and sympathies which cannot be put into words or even into
acts. Thus it brings about subtle and profound integrations
of character, and helps to create the inner poise, serenity,
and emotional order which is necessary before we can create
outer peace and order.

Manual work, as well as singing and folk dancing releases,
sublimates and gives desirable channels for the energy of
resentments whether conscious or forgotten. Manual work
develops all the fine qualities which come from military
discipline, without those which are undesirable . 3 It
creates self-respect and self-reliance, patience and poise.
For a civilization as disordered and full of inner conflict
as ours is, manual work is an important therapy. It eases
the moral strain of long periods of

TRAINING

153

non-violent resistance. Its realistic connection with
materials keeps people's feet on the ground and restrains
any possible tendency toward second rate, inexpensive
mysticism.

Silent meditation may be practised either individually or in
small groups. In large groups it has much less value. Some
people can get little or nothing from it, and they should
rely on other parts of the training. But when meditation is
practised rightly, without distractions, there takes place
an inner integration, a reunion between the more superficial
and the deeper levels of the mind. When carried on regularly
every day over a period of months there comes a silent
growth of imagination and of sensibility. Silent meditation
in groups subtly develops common apprehension, common
sentiment, common purpose, and a deeper understanding and
appreciation of the values we hold together. Individual
meditation permits a search for one's assumptions, and when
the relative premises have all been discovered and set aside
and one finally reaches his ultimate, fundamental assumption
and recognizes it as such, he sees all things more clearly
and attains poise and a sense of rock-bottom sureness.
Properly guided meditation helps us to become less egoistic
and less selfish and facilitates communion with God. These
changes in turn make easier the love of men.

Social service of many sorts is an outer expression of the
inner desire for unity and good will. It completes and makes
fully real the other parts of the discipline, gains
reactions from other people by which to test one's beliefs,
stimulates in other people a corresponding sense of unity
and good will, and converts many apathetic or doubting
people to the validity of the entire programme of
non-violence. For its beneficiaries it frequently prevents
frustrations, and thereby prevents future violence. Yet we
must be careful lest such activities be taken over by
governments and used, as in the case of the Red Cross, for
ulterior political purposes. Also, it will not do to get so
interested in social service that we make avoidable

254 THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

compromises with violence, or water down or omit the other
parts of the discipline.

Practice of non-violence in small ways should include such
matters as always speaking in a low, calm, gentle, evenly
pitched tone of voice; exercising patience, selfcontrol and
courtesy in all the little daily frictions of life; and
always trusting the best in other people. Thus one tests and
proves to oneself frequently the validity and effectiveness
of the method and, like the coral insect, builds in tiny
ways the habits which stand like a rock in the big crises.

Attitudes of which we should rid ourselves include fear,
anger, so-called " righteous " indignation, pride, the
desire for conventional respectability, fondness for money r
and the desire for power over others.

These suggestions are only a beginning. They are an
adaptation of the discipline devised and used by Gandhi, the
greatest modern exemplar of the method. Every one of these
suggestions has been a successful element in some
established professional or cultural discipline. The sum of
the different parts of such training is more moral and
deeper and will become more effective than military
discipline. This new discipline, like all others, will
evolve and become more efficient.

At present, man is the only animal which makes organized war
on its own species. To argue, as some pesimists and many
militarists do, that man can never act otherwise is to
assert that man is less intelligent and less capable of
self-control than any other animal, most insects, or any
microscopic form of life. That I cannot believe. Nor can I
believe that although man has worked out a highly effective
discipline for mass murder, he is incapable of evolving an
effective discipline for powerful mass nonviolence and its
resulting mutual aid and benefit. Man, who has conquered
space with his airplane and radio, and time with his
language and printing, who has learned enough of the
processes of life to breed vegetables and

TRAINING

155

animals with new qualities, can and will learn how to
control himself and direct society to fine ends. If
Occidental civilization fails at the task, it will be
accomplished by the Orient . 4

Toward the close of a life of wide, keen observation and
deep, discriminative thinking Plato said in effect that
persuasion is at the basis of the order of the world . 5
Profoundly wise men of many civilizations have said in
various ways that man has in him the spark and possibility
of divinity. A great and successful exemplar of non-violent
resistance said that we should change our minds completely,
that we should seek first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, that the kingdom of God is at hand, and that
the true followers of the spirit shall do greater things
than he did. With what we now know, these words, spoken at a
time when the outlook was dark, should encourage us to go
forward in firm hope.

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

[^60]: Cf. A. F. Shand "The Foundations of Character",
    Macmillan Co., London and New York, 1914, at pp.Â 214,
    216-217, 250, and Chap. 3 , Sec. 1. Also E. J. Kempf. "The
    Autonomic Functions and the Personality," Nervous and Mental
    Disease Publ. Co., New York and Washington, D. C., 1921,
    pp.Â 79, 80, 82.

    Cf. in accord the "dominance-compliance" concept in "Emotions of Normal People", Wm. M. Marston, International
    Library of Psychology, Philosophy and Scientific Method,
    Kegan Paul, London, and Harcourt, Brace, New York, 1928;
    and in "Integrative Psychology" by W. M. Marston, C. D.
    King and E. H. Marston, same publishers, 1931.

[^61]: Kempf, above cited.

[^62]: Cf. also G. W. Crile---"Origin and Nature of the Emotions"---W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1915. This common
basis or origin of fear and anger may be one reason why it
is impossible to make a valid distinction between aggressive
and defensive war nowadays. Cf. W. L. Crane---"The Passing
of War"---Macmillan, London, 1912; C. C. Morrison---"The
Outlawry of War"---Willett, Clark & Colby, Chicago, 1927.

[^63]: The doubt in the minds of many leaders and academically
educated people that unlearned people could not easily
understand nonviolent resistance and discipline themselves
to it, is unfounded. The great majority of Indians who have
used it under Gandhi's leadership have been illiterate
peasantry. And in the West, industrial strikes, which have
been predominantly non-violent, have been conducted mostly
by people with no great amount of schooling.

[^64]: I. P. Pavlov---"Lectures on Conditioned Reflexes"---International Publishers, New York, 1928.

[^65]: J. B. Watson---"The Heart or the Intellect"---Harper's
Monthly Magazine, Feb.Â 1926; also, J. B. Watson---"Behaviourism"---People's Institute Publishing Co., New
York, 1925.

[^66]: "The Motives of the Soldier"---by T. H. Proctor, 31
International Journal of Ethics 26, at p.Â 36. (Oct.Â 1920.)

[^67]: Lt.-Col L. C. Andrews---"Military Manpower", E. P.
Dutton & Co., New York 1920, p.Â 17.

[^68]: Foch---"Principles of War"---American ed., H. K. Fly
Co., New York, 1918, p.Â 99.

[^69]: Cf. William James' chapter on Habit, in his "Principles
of Psychology".

[^70]: Sir George Lloyd, at that time Governor of the Bombay
    Presidency, in an interview with Mr.Â Drew Pearson, is
    reported to have said:

    "He gave us a scare! His programme filled our jails. You
    can't go on arresting people forever, you know---not when
    there are 319,000,000 of them. And if they had taken his
    next step and refused to pay taxes! God knows where we would
    hgve been.

    "Gandhi's was the most colossal experiment in world
    history; and it came within an inch of succeeding. But he
    couldn't control men's passions. They became violent and he
    called off his programme"... Quoted from article by C. F.
    Andrews---"The Coming Crisis in India"---in the "New
    Republic", New York, April 3, 1929.

[^71]: Cf. Ernest Toller---"Man and the Masses" (Massemenseh)
trans. by L. Untermeyer---Doubleday, Page & Co., New York,
1924.

[^72]: "Passive resistance, if it were adopted deliberately by
the will of the whole nation, with the same measure of
courage and discipline which is now displayed, might achieve
a far more perfect
protection for what is good in national life than armies and
navies can ever achieve, without demanding the carnage and
waste and welter of brutality involved in modern war." B.
Russell---"War and Non-Resistance"---116 Atlantic Monthly
266 (Aug.Â 1915), Boston, U. S. A., reprinted in his book "Justice in War Time"---Allen & Unwin, London, Open Court
Publishing Co., Chicago, 1924.

[^73]: In his book "The Principles of War", American ed.Â trans.
by Major J. de Morinni---H. K. Fly Co., New York, 1918, at
p.Â 316 (reference is to pages in American ed.), English
ed.Â trans. by H. Belloc. French ed.Â Berger-Levrault, Paris,
1917.

[^74]: Sir Ian Hamilton---"The Soul and Body of the Army"---p.Â 134. Edw. Arnold, London, 1921.

3 Lt.-General von Caemmerer---" The Development of
Strategical Science "---Trans, Publ. by Hugh Rees, Ltd.,
London, 1905.

4 Major General Sir F. Maurice---" British Strategy ",
p.Â 67, above cited.

5 " The Real War "---by Captain B. H. Liddell Hart, p.Â 506,
Faber & Faber, London; Little, Brown, Boston, 1930.

6 W. E. Hocking---" Morale and Its Enemies "---Yale
University Press, New Haven, U. S. A., 1918, p.Â 151.

7 See Hocking---" Morale and Its Enemies "; F. C.
Bartlett---" Ps 3 r chology and the Soldier "---Cambridge
University Press, 1927; Lieut.-Col. L. C.
Andrews---"Military Manpower" (Psychology of Military
Training) E. P. Dutton & Co., New York, 1920; H. G. Lord---"
The Psychology of Courage "---Luce & Co., Boston, Mass, 1918
; Sir Ian Hamilton---" The Soul and Body of the Army
"---Edward Arnold, London, 1921. Also an article by Bt.
Lieut.-Col. L. V. Bond, R. E. General Staff, on"The
Principles of Field Service Regulations" in the Journal of
the United Service Institution of India for July, 1921,
Simla, India.

8 For the moment we will defer the case of a massacre due to
the commander of the troops losing his head or using undue
terrorism. That will be discussed later.

9 Rivers---" Instinct and the Unconscious ", p.Â 219, also
211-212. During the First World War, Rivers was on the staff
of a British hospital for treating shell shock and other
nervous diseases of soldiers.

10 Von Clausewitz---" On War"---trans. by Col. J. J. Graham,
Kegan Paul, London, 1911, E. P. Dutton, New York, 1914, Vol.
I, p.Â  99; Von Caemmerer---" Development of Strategical
Science "---trans. Hugh Rees, Ltd., London, 1905, at p.Â 78.

/

166 the power of non-violence

11 T. H. Proctor---" The Motives of the Soldier "---31
International Journal of Ethics, p.Â 26 (Oct.Â 1920). In
accord see Rivers---" Instinct and the Unconscious ",
pp.Â 210, 211, 213.

12 H. C. Lord---" The Psychology of Courage ", p.Â 150, above
cited.

13 Hocking---" Morale and Its Enemies "---p.Â 99, previously
cited.

14 " Military Manpower ", p.Â 175, above cited.

is F. C. Bartlett---" Psychology and the Soldier
"---Cambridge University Press, 1927, pp.Â 172-175;
Hocking---" Morale and Its Enemies ", p.Â 159, previously
cited.

i\<5 Cf. the near mutiny of English soldiers occupying the
Ruhr after the war but while the starvation blockade of
Germany was still in effect.

ii Cf. the conclusions of Sir F. Maurice as to the
undesirability of gas war and bombing civilians from
airplanes, in his " British Strategy ", Chap. 9, above
cited. Cf. also a letter on" Police of the Air " by A. T.
Wilson in the " London Times ", May 7, 1930. An article by
Hoffman Nickerson in the" New York Times " for February' 21,
1932, contains the following pertinent passages: "
Frightfulness, unless it prove an immediate and overwhelming
success,

has shown itself the worst sort of boomerang It is true that
when

one is dealing with barbarians or helpless Chinese the
political disadvantages of frightfulness are less. But even
when it is employed against barbarians the disadvantages are
there. The great French Marshal Lyautey, the conqueror and
organizer of Morocco, strictly limited the use of the
airplane against the natives. In the long run, he said, he
wanted them willingly to consent to French rule. Want of
Discrimination---Bombing of villages from the air hindered
rather than helped his purpose because the airplane bomb is
an undiscriminating weapon which might injure the best
friends of the French\*, in any given village. Furthermore,
the Moroccans, having no planes themselves, thought their
use unsportsmanlike. Lyautey therefore insisted that beating
them in what they consider a fairer fashion was more apt to
persuade them to peace and contentment." Reprinted in his
book---" Can We Limit AVar ? " Chap. 9, F. A. Stokes Co.,
New York, 1934.

is In an article called " Armament and Its Future Uses ", in
the"Yale Review" (New Haven), for July, 1930, at p.Â 652.

19 Gandhi's visit to London for the second Round Table
Conference may prove to have been a disturbance to the
previous solidity of British opinion and purpose in relation
to India.

20 At pp.Â 448, 378 of Shand's book, cited in Chap. II.

20a Cf . the Indian hunter who taught his son always to make
a warning noise just before shooting at game, saying, " When
you give warning you have asserted the superiority of your
nerves over your adversary's, and that is half the battle
won." " Hari, the Jungle Lad"---by D. G. Mukerji, E. P.
Dutton, New York.

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

167

21 " Chivalry, in the broadest sense of the word, is the
cultivation

of respect in an enemy for or by his opponent The side
which,

in war, first attains a superiority in chivalry is the side
which attains a spiritual victory over its enemy, a victory
which normally not only precedes a material success but
which wins the ethical objective of war, which is the true
foundation of the peace which f(\^llo`\vs`{=tex}it.... As
the military object of war is to defeat the enemy, and as
the economic object is to add to the prosperity of the
nation, so is the ethical object to enhance the national
character, that is, to increase its respect in the eyes not
only of the enemy but of neutral nations. A man who fights
cleanly is always applauded even if he lose; consequently,
under certain circumstances, it is even more important to
win the ethical objective than the military one." Pp. 70 and
64 of Col. J. F. C. Fuller's " Reformation of War ",
Hutchinson & Co., London, 1923, and E. P. Dutton & Co., New
York.

2ia Just after his release from prison on May 8, 1933, at
the beginning of his twenty-one day fast, Gandhi was
reported by the press to have said, in reference to the
decline in effectiveness of the civil disobedience movement
at that time: " I have nothing but

praise for the bravery and self-sacrifice of the numerous
civil resisters, but having said that, I cannot help saying
that the secrecy that has attended the movement is fatal to
its success. If, therefore, the movement must be continued,
I would urge those who are guiding the movement in different
parts of the country to discard all secrecy, I do not care
if thereby it becomes difficult to secure a single civil
resister. There can be no doubt that fear has seized the
common mass. The Ordinances have cowed them down and I am
inclined to think that the secret methods are largely
responsible."

Again, in his long statement of reasons' for the renewal of
individual civil disobedience, issued at Ahmedabad on July
27, 1933, Gandhi is reported to have said in regard to
secret methods: " There is nothing inherently wrong in them.
I fully admit the purity of purpose and the great cleverness
of the workers in conducting the campaign of secret methods,
devised to meet the situation created by repressive measures
of Government. But secrecy is. repugnant to Satyagraha and
hampers its progress. It has undoubtedly contributed in a
great measure to the present demoralization of the people. I
know that a ban on secrecy will stop some of the activities
which appear to keep the Congress before the public eye. But
this doubtful benefit will be outweighed by the certain
elimination of a method which is foreign to the spirit of
Satyagraha and which interferes with its efficiency."

22 See Col. Fuller's book, above cited, at p.Â 95.

23 See " Englishmen, Frenchmen, Spaniards, an Essay in
Comparative Psychology " by Salvador de Madariaga, pp.Â 27
and 58. Oxford University Press, London, 1928.

168

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

24 Cf. " The Motives of the Soldier " by T. H. Proctor, 31
Int. J. of Ethics 26, at p.Â 34, Oct.Â 1920.

25 Salvador de Madariaga---" Disarmament ", p.Â 60, Oxford
University Press, London, 1929, Coward-McCann, Inc., New
York.

26 " The Reformation of War " by Col. J. F. C. Fuller,
D.S.O., p.Â 46, above cited.

27 Cf. C. F. Andrews---" India and the Simon Commission
"---Macmillan, 1930.

28 Von Clausewitz---"On War", Vol. Ill, p.Â 209.

29 See A. Ponsonby---"Falsehood in Wartime"---E. P. Dutton,
New York, 1928; Irene Cooper Willis---"England's Holy War",
A. Knopf, New York, 1928; Caroline E. Playne---"Society at
War"---Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 1931 ; Will Irwin---"
The Art of Muddlement "---Scribner's Magazine, New York,
Oct.Â 1929.

30 See Robert Hunter---" Violence and the Labour Movement ",
pp.Â 110-120, Macmillan, New York, 1914.

si See instances cited by William James---" Varieties of
Religious Experience "---Longmans Green, 1902, p.Â 359; C. M.
Case---" NonViolent Coercion "---pp.Â 242-248, Century Co.,
New York, 1923; Adin Ballou---" Christian Non-Violence ",
pp.Â 146-169---Universal Peace Union, Philadelphia, 1910; see
also" The Arm of God ", Oliphants Ltd., London;" The Test of
Faith " by E. Richards, Vol. 131, " Atlantic Monthly ",
p.Â 617.

CHAPTER VII

1 The Irish poet, George Russell (AE) in his book " The
National

Being" (Macmillan, 1916, p.Â 127) says "We must admit that
military genius has discovered and applied with mastery a
law of life which is of the utmost importance to
civilization---far more important to civil even than to
military development---and that is the means by which the
individual will forget his personal danger and sacrifice
life itself for the general welfare. In no other
organization will men in great masses so entirely forget
themselves as men will in battle under military discipline
The military discipline works miracles."

2 " Atlantic Monthly ", Boston, for August, 1928, quotations
are from pp.Â 181 and 182. Captain B. H. Liddell Hart, the
British writer on military strategy, says that to prepare
for peace you must understand war.

3 See article on " Air Power " by A. A. Walser in " The
Nineteenth Century and After " for April, 1923, p.Â 598.

4 See also the British Field Service Regulations, Part II.
But cf.Â  criticisms of Foch on this point in " Foch: The Man
of Orleans " by Captain M. H. Liddell Hart, Eyre &
Spottiswood, London, 1931; Little, Brown, Boston, U. S. A.,
1932.

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

169

5 See Foch---" Principles of War " previously cited, p.Â 318.

If any readers feel that in what follows I am guilty of
repetition, let me quote the words of a famous teacher of
the piano, Tobias Matthay: "While reiteration may be
resented by the casual reader, it is imperative for the true
student. It is only by repetition of the same point under
various aspects that facts are eventually brought home and
grasped, and the vision of the whole not lost sight of in
pursuit of the details of the structure. A genius may not
need

such treatment; he may see things in a flash of intelligence
A

work of the present nature, however, is designed as an
endeavour to help the ordinary worker and seeker after truth
; the genius, himself, may also save years of time and feel
surer of his ground by taking the trouble to master the
facts thus intellectually, as well as by intuition."---" The
Visible and Invisible: An Epitome of the Laws of Pianoforte
Technique ", Oxford University Press, London.

6 Von Clausewitz---" On War "---previously cited, Vol. Ill,
p.Â 210. Captain B. H. Liddlell Hart writes that it is" the
experience of all historjr that, except against an exhausted
or already demoralized foe, decisive success in war is only
possible through surprise "---" The Real War ", p.Â 446,
Faber & Faber, London; Little, Brown, Boston, 1930. See
also" Nelson's Letters and Dispatches ", Vol. IV, p.Â 295,
Letter of March 24, 1801. Also the prize essay of the Royal
United Service Institution for 1928, by Lieut.-Commander J.
D. Prentice, Journal of Royal United Service Institution,
May 1929, Whitehall, London, pp.Â 235, 237, 239.

" Napoleon's " Maxims of War "---Maxim XVI.

s Sir Ian Hamilton---" The Soul and Body of the Army
"---p.Â 134, Edward Arnold, London, 1921.

9Cf. Chaps. II to IV.

io See his " Principles of War ", p.Â 316.

ioaA British psychologist argues that the fundamental
reasons for war are sadism and masochism, and that until
somehow those allegedly deep-seated urges are modified war
cannot be ended. If we were to take his argument at its face
value, I would say that in so far as sadism and masochism
are perverted expressions of a desire for power, non-violent
resistance can control them by substituting its own method
of securing a power that is greater and more satisfying. The
energy and unifying power of the method yull also straighten
out the other perversions involved in sadism and masochism.
See " War, Sadism and Pacificism " by Edward Glover, Allen &
Unwin, London, 1933.

li Â« Principles of War ", p.Â 32.

170

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

CHAPTER VIII

1 E. g., F. Oppenheimer, H. J. Laski, W. E. Hocking, G. B.
Shaw, Spengler, Mommsen, Tolstoi, Veblen, John Dewey, von
Clausewitz, Lenin, Admiral A. T. Mahan, Sigmund Freud, in
his " Reflections on War and Death ", trans. by Brill and
Kuttner, Moffat Yard, New York, 1918.

2 Fear, even when used by governments to enlist popular
support of a war, may become a boomerang and impair
individual efficiency as well as group morale.

3 Von Clausewitz wrote that " war is a part of political
intercourse " and " war is only a continuation of State
policy by other means "---von Clausewitz" On War ",
previously cited, Vol. I, p.Â  xxviii and Vol. Ill, p.Â 121.
De Madariaga agrees, saying," The army and navy are but the
military wing of the nation's diplomacy. In normal times the
foreign secretary carries on the war.---Armaments appear to
us as instruments of policy. They are indeed the most
important instrument of policy, together with financial
power." See his " Disarmament ", above cited, pp.Â 59, 60

4 1 am not here considering the police.

5 The great Indian philosopher, Aurobindo Ghose, in his book
" War and Self-Determination " (publ. by S. Ghose, Calcutta,
1922) writes :

" So long as war does not become psychologically impossible,
it will remain, or, if banished for a while, return. War
itself, it is hoped, will end war; the expense, the horror,
the butchery, the disturbance of tranquil life, the whole
confused sanguinary madness of the thing has reached or will
reach such colossal proportions that the human raÂ£e will
fling the monstrosity behind it in weariness and disgust.
But weariness and disgust, horror and pity, even the opening
of the eyes to reason by the practical facts of the waste of
human life and energy and the harm and extravagance are not
permanent factors; they last only while the lesson is fresh/
Afterwards, there is forgetfulness; human nature recuperates
itself and recovers the instincts that were temporarily
dominated. . . War is no longer, perhaps, a biological
necessity, but it is still a psychological necessity; what
is within must manifest itself outside.

" . . â¢ Only when man has developed not merely a
fellowfeeling with all men, but a dominant sense of unity
and commonalty, only when he is aware of them not merely as
brothers,---that is ff a fragile bond,---but as parts of
himself, only when he has learned to live, not in his
separate personal and communal ego-sense, but in a large
universal consciousness, can the phenomenon of war, with
whatever weapons, pass out of his life without the
possibility of return."

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

171

This opinion is in substance echoed by Bertrand Russell. He
writes in an article, " What 1 Believe " in the "Forum" (New
York) for Sept.Â 1929 :

" The supposed economic causes of war, except in the case of
certain capitalistic enterprises, are in the nature of a
rationalization; people wish to fight, and they therefore
persuade themselves that it is to their interest to do so.
The important question, then, is the psychological one---'
Why do people wish to fight? ' And this leads on from war to
a host of other questions concerning impulses to cruelty and
oppression in general. These questions in their turn involve
a study of the origins of the malevolent passions, and
thence of psychoanalysis and the theory of education. . . .

" The basis of international anarchy is man's proneness to
fear and hatrdd. This is also the basis of economic disputes
; for the love of power, which is at their root, is
generally an embodiment of fear."

6 Cf. Wm. McDougal---"Janus, or the Future of War"---Kegan
Paul, London, and E. P. Dutton, New York, 1927. Also Major
Sherman Miles---" The Problem of the Pacifist ", 217 North
American Review 313, March, 1923.

7 Reinhold Niebuhr---"A Critique of Pacifism"---139 Atlantic
Monthly 637, May 1927, Boston, U. S. A.

8 In his " Democracy, Pacifism and Imperialism ", pp.Â 196,
197 of" The Proletarian Revolution in Russia " by N. Lenin
and L. Trotsky, ed.Â by L. Frama, The Communist Press, New
York, 1918.

9 See " The Soviet Union and Peace "---Martin Lawrence,
Ltd., London, 1929.

10 De Madariaga---" Disarmament ", pp.Â 42, 45, 48, 56, 61,
198. But this need not mean a super-State with supremely
powerful armed forces. As soon as one nation organize itself
for non-violent resistance and wins an international
struggle by those tactics, there will be imitators, and our
present international relationships will change completely.

11 See " Diversification of Crops " by C. Y. Shepard, Yol.
II, No.Â 5, " Tropical Agriculture ", Imperial College of
Tropical Agriculture, St.Â  Augustine, Trinidad, B. W. I.

12 " Land Tenure and Unemployment "---Frank Geary, Allen &
Unwin, London, 1925.

13 Cf. H. J. Laski---" Aristocracy Still the Ruling Class in
England "---Current History, New York, July, 1930.

ii See " English Prisons under Local Government "---by
Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Longmans Green, London,
1927;"English Prisons Today---Being a Report of the Prison
System Enquiry Committee"---edited by S. Hobhouse and A. F.
Brockway---Longmans

172

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

Green, London, 1922; " Penology in the United States "---by
L. N. Robinson, J. C. Winston Co., Philadelphia, 1923;"
Probation and Delinquency" by E. J. Cooley---Nelson, New
York, 1927; T. M. Osborne---"Society and Prisons"---Yale
University Press, 1916; Ibid.---"Prisons and Common
Sense"---1924; G. B. Shaw---" Imprisonment "---Brentano, New
York, 1925, now by Dodd, Mead & Co., New York (a reprint of
his introduction to" English Prisons under Local Government
", supra); Frank Tannenbaum---" Wall Shadows "---Putnam, New
York, 1922; Wm. Healy---"The Individual Delinquent"---1915,
New York; Donald Lownes---" My Life in Prison "; A1
Jennings---" Through the Shadows with O. Henry "; F. R.
Johnson---" Probation for Juveniles and Adults "; G.
Godwin---" Cain or the Future of Crime "---Kegan Paul,
London, and E. P. Dutton, N. Y., 1929;" Handbook of American
Prions ", 1926, Putnam. New York; J. O. Stutzman---" Curing
the Criminal "---Macmillan, New York, 1926; F. C.
Bartlett---" Psychology and the Soldier "---Cambridge
University Press, 1927, p.Â 124; R. N. Baldwin---" Pacifism
and the Criminal "---in D. Allen's" Pacifism in the Modern
World," Doubleday Doran, New York, 1929; L. E. Lawes---"
Life and Death in Sing Sing"---Doubleday, Doran & Co., New
York and London, 1929; Margaret Wilson, " The Crime of
Punishment "---Jonathan Cape, London, Harcourt Brace, New
York, 1931 ; Clarence Darrow---" Resist Not Evil
"---Haldeman-Julius, Girard, Kansas, U. S. A.;" Kropotkin's
Revolutionary Pamphlets "---ed.Â by R. N. Baldwin, Vanguard
Press, New York, 1927;" The Morality of Punishment " by A.
C. Ewing, Kegan Paul, London, 1929; " The Death Penalty
Enquiry "---A Review of the Evidence before the Select
Committee on Capital Punishment, by E. Roy Calvert,
Gollancz, London, 1929;" Taming the Criminal " by John Lewis
Giliin, Macmillan, New York, 1931.

One of the ablest brief statements of the whole problem is
G. B. Shaw's " Imprisonment ", cited above. It dodges none
of the hard facts, idulges in no sentiment, is inclusive in
scope, is short, courageous and cogent. He has studied the
subject very thoroughly as a member of the British Prison
System Enquiry Committee. His statement is so clear and
compact that I cannot forbear quoting two paragraphs from
his recapitulation :

" 3. The prison authorities profess three objects: (a)
retribution (a euphemism for vengeance), (b) deterrance (a
euphemism for terrorism), and (c) reform of the prisoner.
They achieve the first by simple atrocity. They fail in the
second through lack of the necessary certainty of detection,
prosecution and conviction; partly because their methods are
too cruel and mischievous to secure the co-operation of the
public; partly because the prosecutor is put to serious
inconvenience and loss

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

173

of time; partly because most people desire to avoid an
unquestionable family disgrace much more than to secure a
very questionable justice; and partly because the proportion
of avowedly undetected crimes is high enough to hold out
reasonable hopes to the criminal that he will never be
called to account. The third (reform) is irreconcilable with
the first (retribution); for the figures of recidivism and
the discovery that the so-called Criminal Type is really a
prison type, prove that the retribution process is one of
uncompensated deterioration.

" 4. The cardinal vice of the system is the anti-Christian
vice of vengeance, or the intentional duplication of
malicious injuries partly in pure spite, partly in
compliance with the expiatory superstition that two blacks
make a white. The criminal accepts this, but claims that
punishment absolves him if the injuries are equivalent, and
still more if he has the worse of the bargain, as he almost
always has. Consequently, when absolution on his release is
necessarily denied him, and he is forced back into crime by
the refusal to employ him, he feels that he is entitled to
revenge this injustice by becoming an enemy of society "

(Recidivism means criminals returning to jail for subsequent
offences. By the phrase " prison type " Shaw means a type
created by the prison environment.)

Shaw also remarks, " The effect of revenge, or retribution
from without, is to destroy the conscience of the aggressor
instantly."

is See " The Defective, Delinquent and Insane " by Henry A.
Cotton, M.D., and his 1933 report as Medical Director and
Director of Research of the New Jersey State Hospital. See
also " Biochemistry and Mental Phenomena " by Joseph
Needham, an Appendix in " The Creator Spirit " by C. E.
Raven, Martin Hopkinson, London, 1927, pp.Â 296-299.

16 Perhaps even psychiatry itself needs reform for this
purpose. See T. Burrow---" The Social Basis of Consciousness
", previously cited.

17 See E. Richards---" The Test of Faith "---131 Atlantic
Monthly 617;" The Arm of God "---Oliphants, Ltd., London,
pp.Â 56, 142-151, 159. It is interesting to recall that
Christ used non-violent methods when he dealt with an insane
boy.

is Cf. the conduct of the Abbe toward the thief in Victor
Hugo's " Les Miserables ".

19 See collection of Gandhi's writings entitled " Young
India, 1919-1922", pp.Â 1116, 1117, 1118, 1120-22,
1125---Ganesan, Madras, also B. W. Huebsch, New York. Also
the article " Some Rules of Satyagraha " in his paper Young
India for Feb.Â 27, 1930.

174

. THE POWER OP NON-VIOLENCE

CHAPTER IX

1 Encyclopedia Britannica, 14th Ed., article entitled "
Hormones "; and" Homeopathic Principles in Therapeutics " by
T. H. McGavack, Boericke & Tafel, Philadelphia, 1932. Also
see Fischer and Penzoldt; Liebig's Annals, 238, 135, 1887;
and article on "Smell and Taste" in Encyclopedia Britannica,
14th Ed.

2 See " Irritability " by Max Verworn, Yale University
Press, New Haven, Conn., 1913, pp.Â 209 to 234.

3 See the summary of reports of such experiments (with
references to date and place of first publication) in " A
Study of the Simile Principle in Medicine " by L. J. Boyd,
M.D., Boericke & Tafel, Philadelphia, 1936, especially
pp.Â 326 to 361. Also Verworn, above cited, pp.Â 42, 43, 61.

4 Boyd, above cited pp.Â 335-361. Also Verworn, above cited,
pp.Â 42, 43, 61, 62, 218.

5 Boyd, above cited, pp.Â 335-361.

6 See " Prisoners and Common Sense ", by Thomas Mott Osborne
(former Warden at Auburn and Sing Sing Prisons, New York),
Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1924;" The Criminal as a Human
Being " by George S. Dougherty (former Deputy Commissioner
and Chief of Detectives, New York), D. Appleton & Co., New
York and London, 1924; " 500 Criminal Careers " by S. and E.
T. Glueck, Knopf, New York, 1930; " A Psychological and
Educational Survey of 1916 Prisoners in the Western
Pennsylvania Penitentiary of Pennsylvania " by William T.
Root, Jr., published by the Board of Trustees of that
prison, 1927; " Criminology " by Robert H. Gault (Editor of
the Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology), D. C. Heath &
Co., New York, 1932; " The Offenders " by Burdette G. Lewis
(Commissioner of Correction, City of New York), Harper
Bros., New York, 1917; " Curing the Criminal " by Jesse O.
Stutsman (General Superintendent of Rockview Penitentiary,
Bellefonte, Pennsylvania), Macmillan, New York, 1926; " I
Knew Them in Prison " by Mary B. Harris, Viking Press, New
York, 1936; " Sing Sing Doctor " by Amos O. Squire, M.D.,
Doubleday Doran, New York, 1935; " Penal Discipline " by
Mary Gordon (Late H. M. Inspector of Prisons), George
Routledge & Sons, London, 1922; "Taming the Criminal" by
John Lewis Gillin (Professor of Sociology, University of
Wisconsin), New York, 1931.

7 See " The Social Life of Animals " by W. C. Allee, Norton,
New York, 1938.

s Cf. A. N. Whitehead " Adventures of Ideas," Macmillan, New
York, 1933, pp.Â 105, 108, 31, 53, 205.

9 See " The Source of Civilization " by Gerald Heard.

10 " Over the Carriage Rose Prophetic a Voice."

11 This is clearly and interestingly shown by many
experiments in Gestalt psychology. See the books by Koffka
and Kohler; "A

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

175

Source Book of Gestalt Psychology " edited by W. D. Ellis,
Harcourt, New York, 1938, Kegan Paul, London; " The Science
of Psychology " by R. H. Wheeler, Crowell, New York, 1929 ;
" Principles of General Psychology " by Ellis Freeman, Holt,
New York, 1939.

iia The processes of persuasion are both subtle and complex.
We can realize better how complex they are if we make a list
of some of the factors which undoubtedly take part in
initiating, influencing, or determining actions. Bodily
condition, for example, is one of these. If one is sick, he
will not undertake certain actions, or if he does he will
usually do them poorly, or be unable to persist long, or
maybe his judgment will be poor. One's emotions initiate or
influence certain types of action. If he is hungry he acts
one way; if fearful, another; if hapov, still another. Some
influential factors

formal training intellectual energy ability to coordinate
ideas with action past experience sense of probability
judgment imagination

speed, range, clearness, and depth of intelligence desire
for consistency desire for order clearness of ideas of order
speed and ease of learning one's picture of onself and
desire to play the part egoism

accuracy, detail, range, and duration of memory In order to
persuade an opponent, one must use powers which will alter a
controlling portion of the foregoing factors in him in such
a way as to result in a more fully realized unity of purpose
and energy than before.

Space in this edition is too limited to permit detailed
analysis of the comparative effects of violence and
non-violence on each of the above-listed factors entering
into persuasion. But as one brief instance, careful
psychological studies have shown that even bare perceptions
have in them an element of interpretation. Walking along the
road in the twilight, a calm person will see in the roadway
a bit of old rope, while a nervous person will see in the
same place

are :

assumptions

perceptions

knowledge

sentiments

prejudices

beliefs

hopes

affections and loyalties conflicts of loyalties desires

conflicts of desires trust

love of truth persistence habits foresight planning ability
economic motives flexibility in interpretations or in fresh
integrations of meaning

176

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

a snake. Kindness and non-violence help to create states of
mind and feeling which promote true interpretations and
perceptions. In various places we have suggested how such
analysis may be made, and must leave the actual making of
them to the reader's imagination. But it is safe to say that
in relation to the welfare of society and co-operative
action among its members, a sense of unity, gentle kindness,
and non-violent resistance to evil affect every one of the
above-named factors favourably. On the other hand, violence
and coercion affect every one of them unfavourably.
Non-violence promotes co-operation for social benefit ;
coercion decreases such cooperation. Non-violence and love
are persuasive.

12 See pp.Â 24, 28 above.

13 See " Personal Aggressiveness and War " by E. F. M.
Durbin and J. Bowlby, Kegan Paul, London, 1939, and Columbia
University Press, New York, 1940.

nSee " Personal Aggression and War " above cited and "
Frustration and Aggression " by Dollard, Dook, et ,al.Â Yale
University Press and Oxford University Press, 1939.

15 Most of the ideas of this paragraph and the next one are
derived from an excellent little book, " The Impulse to
Dominate " by D. W. Harding, Allen & Unwin, London, 1941.

16 See the " Impulse to Dominate " above cited; also "
Domination and Integration in the Social Behaviour of Young
Children " by Harold H. Anderson, Genetic Psychology
Monographs, Vol. 19, No.Â 3, August, 1937, The Journal Press,
Provincetown, Massachusetts.

17 See " The Functions of the Executive " by I. Barnard,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1940.

18 See " The Functions of the Executive " above cited.

19 Cf. "Is Germany Curable ?" by Richard M. Brickner, M. D.,
Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1943.

20 Most of the ideas of this paragraph and the two preceding
paragraphs I owe to the important book, " An Essay in
Metaphysics " bjr R. G. Collingwood, Oxford University
Press, 1940.

21 Lack of space prevents more detailed discussion of the
manner of such changes. But it will be useful to enumerate
here some kinds of assumptions which the non-violent
resister will be apt to encounter. These assumptions are
-inconsistent with those of persons considered wisest in all
the great civilizations of all recorded history, and may
therefore be called mistaken assumptions. Most of them are
relative, but some are absolute.

Mistaken Assumptions

A. That the only practical human relationship is of
dominance on one side and submission on the other.

B. That other people are a means for the purposes of those
who dominate.

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

177

C. That because social order is of primary importance, the
particular social order now existent is the only valuable
and practical social order and therefore must be rigidly
maintained. This assumption is often made also as to the
existing political system.

D. That a valued end justifies the use of any means.

E. That management or ruling is the most important of all
social functions.

F. That therefore managers and rulers should be rewarded by
extra privileges and greater wealth of all kinds.

G. That those now in control necessarily have superior
fitness to govern.

H. That those now in control are in all ways superior
people.

I. That those who ate physically strong, those who control
the most technical knowledge, the most machines, the most
materials, and the largest markets, are the ones who do
survive and should survive.

J. That managers or rulers are . not subject to, the poison
of power, nor to corruption, and are not as selfish as
others.

K. That practically all other people are predominantly
selfish, greedy, envious, and desirous of superior power.

L. That the weaknesses of mankind are greater than their
virtues.

M. That money is the most important value.

N. That the possession of money is a sign and proof of
political and social worth.

O. That production of material goods is more important than
the production of healthy and normal people and of sound
human relationships.

P. That certain races, nations or classes are incapable of
selfgovernment and should not be allowed even a veto power
over what they are told to do.

Q. That in an organization great size is proof of its value
to society.

R. That institutions are more important than people. (Note
here that society is not an institution.)

S. That there is no supreme unifying principle or axiom more
inclusive and more fundamental even than the principle which
scientists assume underlies and unites all natural forces.
Cf. Collingwood, above cited. Religions have given names to
this supreme unifying principle whose existence is an
absolute assumption. Some of those names are Brahma, Atman,
Jehovah, God, Allah.

T. That the supreme unifying principle is not really and
constantly as powerful in men's affairs as, for instance,
the fbrce of gravitation, or as the rules of chess, which
control every move of the chessmen on the board.

178

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

U. That this supreme unifying principle is not immanent in
all people but, if at all, only in certain select
individuals including the rulers, or in certain select
nations. (Such immanence would be somewhat like the
immanence of the axioms in all geometrical propositions, or
of the rules of a chess game in the players and the pieces
used.)

CHAPTER X

1 See Alexander R. Luria, "The Nature of Human Conflict"
translated from the Russian by W. Horsely Gantt, Liveright
Publishing Corporation, New York, 1932; also F. Aveling, "
Personality and Will," Nisbet & Co., London, 1931; Cf. also
" The Psychology of Intelligence and Will" by H. G. Wyatt,
\^Kegan Paul, London, and Harcourt, New York; and a paper on
"Will and Needs" by Kurt Lewin in "A Source Eook of Gestalt
Psychology" above cited.

2 " Adventures of Ideas " by A. N. Whitehead, Macmillan, New
York, 1933, p.Â 70.

3W. W. Norton & Co., New York.

4 See " Of Men and Women " by Pearl Buck, The John Day Co.,
New York, 1941.

CHAPTER XI

1 " The Peace Team " by Douglas Steere.

" Discipline for World Builders " by Dan West, Brethren
Service Committee, Church of the Brethren, Elgin, 111.

" Training for the Life of the Spirit," Parts I and II, by
Gerald Heard, Harpers, New York.

" Training for Peace " by Richard B. Gregg, Lippincott (out
of print).

" A Discipline for Non-violence " by Richard B. Gregg,
Pendle Hill, Wallingford, Pa.

" Training " by Muriel Lester, Abingdon-Cokesbury Press,
Nashville, Tenn.

2 Such changes will of course mean a broad programme of
social reforms. There is not room here for me to offer my
proposals of that sort. Yet not in institutions does
initiative reside, but in persons. Before there could be
socialism there had to be a Karl Marx; before there was
Christianity there was Christ. Even though institutions are
a powerful factor in creating certain habits of thought and
certain kinds of people, institutions are not the only
creative factor. Originative' power lies more in people. A
non-violent society can grow only from the labours of
non-violent people. The development" of such people seems to
come first, so I limit myself here to that consideration.

3 See my "Discipline for Non-violence" above cited.

NOTES BY CHAPTERS

179

4 Despite the primary importance of developing the kind of
people who can build a non-violent civilization, and lienee
the importance of a training programme, I realize that to
say no more than what is in this chapter would leave most
people unsatisfied, and with a sense of hanging in mid-air.
They also want some idea of the tools with which adequately
trained people should try to build a non-violent world. And
so, since space after all permits, I very briefly indicate
here some tentative recommendations for a programme of
social changes.

Because socialism must result in centralization of power,
and because I believe the saying that " power corrupts and
absolute power corrupts absolutely," I cannot advocate
socialism as a means of building a non-violent society. And
as I agree with those population experts who foresee in all
the industrialized nations of the world a rapid decrease in
population, I expect a correspondingly rapid decline in
capitalism, large-scale technology, industrialism, and
commerce. Hence my proposals do not deal directly with
modern technology and its implications.

I advocate :

(1) A strong preference for agriculture as a way of life,
    and such emphasis on agriculture that it will become the
    controlling factor in the State.

(2) Simplicity of living.

(3) Decentralization and local autonomy; i.e., emphasis on
    the superior value of small organizations in all fields.

(4) As for integrating small units into inclusive larger
    units, which now is done usually by either money,
    violence, or political manipulation, I advocate the
    invention and use of modes of integration looser than
    and morally superior to money, violence, and competition
    for power.

(5) Extension of cooperatives.

(6) National, state, municipal, and rural use of Henry
    George's principles of "single tax". This need not be
    inconsistent with (4).

(7) Certain money and banking reforms.

(8) Ending of racial discrimination.

(9) Abandonment of imperialism.

(10) The development of religious practices which will
     really give to many people direct experience of
     communion with God.

(11) When, as a result, an effective plurality of society
     really believe in God and His effective power, then
     bring about a reorganization of society so that
     ultimate guidance of society and of governments shall
     rest with religious seers, who must themselves never
     take part in politics or hold any office but whose
     authority is purely moral and depends only on
     recognition of their actual wisdom. They

180

THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE

must avoid the corruption of power. The active managing arid
ruling groups in economic, political, educational,
religious, and other spheres would be separate, but would,
on questions of policy, seek the advice of the seers.

(12) The masses should be so thoroughly trained in, and
     understanding of, non-violent resistance that at any
     time they can offer an effective veto to the proposals
     of their rulers or to invasion by an aggressive outside
     group or nation.

5 In " The Timaeus " Â§48A, Trans, by R. G. Bury, Loeb ed.,
G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York; Heinemann, London.

[^1]: This is based on and largely quoted from accounts by
    A. Fenner Brockway in his "Non-cooperation in Other
    Lands"---Tagore & Co., Madras, India, and his essay
    "Does Non-cooperation Work?", in "Pacifism in the Modern
    World"---ed.Â by D. Allen, Doubleday, Doran, New York,
    1929.

[^2]: For further details see M. K. Gandhi---"Satyagraha in
    South Africa"---S. Ganesan, Madras, 1928; "Mahatma
    Gandhi---Life, Writings and Speeches"---Ganesh, Madras;
    "Speeches and Writings of M. K. Gandhi"---Natesan,
    Madras; "M. K. Gandhi" by J. J. Doke, Natesan, Madras;
    M. K. Gandhi---"My Experiments with Truth", Vols. I and
    II, Navajivan Press, Ahmedabad, India, 1927, 1929;
    "Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas" by C. F. Andrews---Allen &
    Unwin, London, and Macmillan, New York, 1930; "Mahatma
    Gandhi"---G. A. Natesan & Co., Madras, 1930; "Mahatma
    Gandhi" by R. M. Gray and M. C. Parekh, Association
    Press, Calcutta, 1928; "Mahatma Gandhi; His Own Story"
    ed.Â by C. F. Andrews, Allen & Unwin, London, and
    Macmillan, New York, 1930; "Mahatma Gandhi at Work" by
    C. F. Andrews, Allen & Unwin, London, and Macmillan, New
    York, 1831; J. C. Winslow V. Elwin---"Gandhi: the Dawn
    of Indian Freedom"---Fleming H. Revell Co., New York,
    published as "The Dawn of Indian Freedom"---Allen &
    Unwin, London, 1931; "Gandhi the Apostle"---by H. T.
    Muzumdar, Chicago, Universal Press, 1923; Frederick B.
    Fisher---"That Strange Little Brown Man, Gandhi"---Long
    & Smith, New York, 1932.

[^3]: See also "Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas" by C. F. Andrews,
    above cited, pp.Â 177-179; and Winslow and Elwin,
    "Gandhi: the Dawn of Indian Freedom", above cited,
    pp.Â 148-151.

[^4]: For the early stages of this struggle see "Essays
    Political and National" by S. E. Stokes, Chaps. 12 and
    13---S. Ganesan, Madras, 1921.

[^5]: See files of "Young India," Ahmedabad, 1928 and early
    1929, for full details. Also files of Bombay and other
    Indian papers and journals. Also "The Story of Bardoli"
    by Mahadev Desai, Navajivan Press, Ahmedabad, India,
    1929; Winslow and Elwin, above cited, pp.Â 142-144.

[^6]: For detailed accounts see the files of "The Manchester
    Guardian" and the "Nation" (New York) for 1922 and 1923,
    also Save! Zimand---"Living India", Chap. 13, Longmans
    Green, 1928.

[^7]: For description of this movement see "Young India
    1919-22" Ganesan, Madras, and Huebsch, New York;
    Krishnadas---"Seven Months with Mahatma Gandhi"---Vol.
    I, Ganesan, Madras, 1928, Vol. II, Rambinode Sinha,
    Dighwara, Behar, India, 1928; and Savel Zimand---"Living
    India", Chaps. 11 and 12, above cited; "Mahatma
    Gandhi"---G. A. Natesan, Madras, 1930; "Mahatma Gandhi's
    Ideas" by C. F. Andrews, above cited; "Mahatma Gandhi"
    by Gray and Parekh, above cited; and Winslow and Elwin,
    above cited.

[^8]: See Winslow and Elwin, above cited, pp.Â 151-170;
    Frederick B. Fisher, above cited, especially Chap. 4;
    and Haridas T. Muzumdar---"Gandhi Versus the
    Empire"---Universal Press, New York, 1932.

[^9]: For other instances of the use of non-violent
    resistance by individuals see the lives of Buddha and
    Christ and records of the early Quakers and Moravians.
    Also Devere Allen---"The Fight for Peace"---Chaps. 22
    and 23, Macmillan, 1930; C. M. Case---"Nonviolent
    Coercion"---Century Co., New York, 1923; Adin
    Ballou---"Christian Non-Resistance"---2nd ed., Universal
    Peace Union, Philadelphia, 1910; J. H. Holmes---"New
    Wars for Old", Chaps. V and VI, Dodd, Mead, New York,
    1916; Erica and Roderic Dunkerley ---"The Arm of
    God"---Oliphants, Ltd., Edinburgh, 1917; William
    James---"Varieties of Religious Experience"---Longmans
    Green, 1902, p.Â 359; "The Test of Faith" by E. Richards,
    "Atlantic Monthly," Vol. 131, p.Â 617, May 1923; Thomas
    Hancock---"Principles of Peace Exemplified"---1825; Carl
    Heath---"Pacifism in Time of War"---Headley Bros.,
    London, 1915; J. W. Graham---"Conscription and
    Conscience"---Allen & Unwin, London, 1922; D. C.
    Moomaw---"Christianity Versus War"---Brethren Pub. Co.,
    Ashland, O., 1924; A. Fenner Brockway---previously
    cited; Norman Thomas---"Is Conscience a
    Crime?"---Vanguard Press, New York, 1928; W. J.
    Chamberlain---"Fighting for Peace"---No More War
    Movement, London, 1929; Edward Needes
    Wright---"Conscientious Objectors in the Civil
    War"---Univ. of Pennsylvania Press and Oxford Univ.
    Press 1931.

    For examples of group or mass use of non-violent
    resistance, in addition to the Indian instances above
    cited, see Devere Allen---"The Fight for Peace"; C. M.
    Case---"Non-violent Coercion"; Adin Ballou---"Christian
    Non-Resistance"; J. H. Holmes---"New Wars for Old," all
    cited above in this note.

[^10]: "All observers agree that it is easier and requires
    less courage to attack than to withstand fire without
    retaliation," F. C. Bartlett---"Psychology and the
    Soldier"---Cambridge University Press, 1927, at p.Â 175.

[^11]: P. 448 of A. F. Shand's "The Foundations of
    Character"---Macmillan, London and New York, 1914.

[^12]: "Don't resist when your opponent pushes you; rather
    increase your pace in that direction and pull him a
    little at the same time, or vice versa should he be
    pulling you. Don't let him ever get the 'strain' on you,
    but go with him, if anything a little faster than his
    pull would cause you to. By following this precept you
    are---if I may describe it so---almost catching your
    balance before he wishes you lost it," while he is
    practically losing his and is without the aid of your
    resistance---on which he has been more or less depending
    to help him regain his balance. Thus in an easy and
    simple manner you neutralize his efforts to get you off
    your balance and at the same time create a favourable
    opportunity of effecting a throw, by keeping him off
    his..." "Jiu-Jitsu" by Uyenishi. Athletic Publications,
    Ltd., London. See also article by Prof.Â Jigosa Kano in
    "Modern Review" (Calcutta) for Nov.Â 1922, pp.Â 637-638.

[^13]: W. B. Cannon---"Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear
    and Rage"---D. Appleton & Co., New York and London,
    1927.

[^14]: G. W. Crile---"Origin and Nature of the
    Emotions"---W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia and New
    York, 1915, especially pp.Â 30, 52, 61. Also W. E.
    Hocking---"Morale and Its Enemies" Yale University
    Press, New Haven, U. S. A., 1918, at pp.Â 53, 54.

[^15]: This suggests that the whole Western world, with its
    fondness for violence, and yet its knowledge of
    Christian and Buddhist ethics, is in a state of inner
    conflict and disintegrated personality, and needs a sort
    of psychoanalysis and suggestion to free it. Cf. T.
    Burrow---"The Social Basis of Consciousness"---Kegan
    Paul, London, and Harcourt Brace, New York, 1927.
    Perhaps this is why all modern nations, on going into
    war, protest that they are acting purely on the
    defensive.

[^16]: Baudouin, one of the leaders of the Nancy school of
    psychologists, gives the two following "laws of
    suggestion":

    "1. Law of Concentrated Attention: The idea which tends
    to realize itself in this way is always an idea upon
    which spontaneous attention is concentrated.

    "2. Law of Auxiliary Emotion: When for one reason Or
    another, an idea is enveloped in a powerful emotion
    there is more likelihood that this idea will be
    suggestively realized."

    Page 143 of his "Suggestion and Auto-Suggestion",
    translated by Eden and Cedar Paul, Dodd, Mead & Co., New
    York, and Allen and Unwin, London, 1931.

[^17]: Cf. W. E. Hocking---"Human Nature and Its
    Remaking"---2nd ed.Â at p.Â 374---Yale University Press,
    New Haven, U. S. A., and Oxford University Press,
    London, 1928.

[^18]: Wm. McDougal and A. G. Tansley.

[^19]: "In modern civilization... the individual's great
    struggle in life is not so much a problem of
    self-preservation in a physical sense as it is one of
    attaining social approbation and potency..." "As society
    increases its care for the individual, and the
    individual for society... the individual grows more and
    more to need social esteem in order to feel safe and
    comfortable One of the most persistent causes of anxiety
    and depression is the fear that he has lost prestige
    through a blunder or a vicious indulgence." E. J.
    Kempf---"Autonomic Functions and the
    Personality"---pp.Â 93, 94 and 95. Nervous and Mental
    Diseases Publ. Co., New York and Washington, D. C.,
    1921.

[^20]: Macmillan, London and New York, 1916.

[^21]: See Clive Bell---"Civilization"---pp.Â 221, 222,
    Chatto and Windus, London, 1928; also "The Motives of
    the Soldier" by T. H. Proctor, 31 International Journal
    of Ethics, p.Â 26, Oct.Â 1920.

[^22]: "When fear restrains the impulse of anger, in a mind
    capable of reflection and foresight, it tends to render
    anger deliberately cruel". What is meant by cruelty
    implies enjoyment in inflicting pain, and the intention
    or desire to inflict it.---For this anger that is
    successful in attaining its end has the enjoyment of
    success, and. when this success coincides with the
    subjection of another, the enjoyment of pride.

    "When fear restrains the impulse of anger, it tends to
    render anger at first more painful, and afterwards
    revengeful and cruel; as if there were a desire of
    inflicting suffering in revenge for the pains of fear
    But when the initial and painful stage of anger is

    prolonged, when it is restrained by the most painful of
    all emotions, fear, so humiliating to pride, we can
    understand how the coward who dares not attack his enemy
    openly, or without superior advantages, broods over his
    revenge, and how his revenge becomes deliberate,
    implacable and cruel. And thus it is that cowardly men
    are often cruel, because the same circumstances that
    tend to arouse their anger tend also to arouse fear, so
    that there arises a constant interaction between these
    emotions." A. F. Shand, "The Foundations of
    Character"---Macmillan, London, 1914, pp.Â 268, 269.

[^23]: Cf. Chap. V.

[^24]: A. F. Shand---"The Foundations of Character," p.Â 448.

[^25]: Love must be based on a knowledge of the fundamental
    unity of all mankind as the greatest moral truth.

[^26]: W. E. Hocking says, "Unless I am, in fact, so much of
    a seer to be a lover of my enemy, it is both futile and
    false to assume the behaviour of love; we can generally
    rely on the enemy to give such conduct its true name."
    "Human Nature and Its Remaking," 2nd ed.Â  p.Â 376, Yale
    University Press, New Haven, 1928.

    Gandhi said to me in reference to such a situation, "If
    you have a sword in your bosom, take it out and use it
    like a man," meaning, of course, that if you really wish
    to injure your enemy, do it openly and courageously.

[^27]: In "Young India" for Nov.Â 5, 1925, Gandhi wrote in
    answer to a question why he had enlisted men for service
    in the World War: "As a citizen not then and not even
    now, a reformer leading an agitation against the
    institution of war, I had to advise and lead men who
    believed in war, but who from cowardice, or from base
    motives or from anger against the British Government
    refrained from enlisting. I did not hesitate to advise
    them that so long as they believed in war and professed
    loyalty to the British constitution they were in duty
    bound to support it by enlistment. Though I do not
    believe in the use of arms, and though it is contrary to
    the religion of *Ahimsa* which I profess, I should not
    hesitate to join an agitation for a repeal of the
    debasing Arms Act which I have considered amongst the
    blackest crimes of the British Government against India.
    I do not believe in retaliation, but I did not hesitate
    to tell the villagers of Bettiah four years ago that
    they who knew nothing of *Ahimsa* were guilty of
    cowardice in failing to defend the honour of their w r
    omen-folk and their property by force of arms. And I
    have not hesitated, as the correspondent should know,
    only recently to tell the Hindus that if they do not
    believe in out-and-out *Ahmisa* and cannot practise it,
    they will be guilty of a crime against their religion
    and humanity if they fail to defend by force of arms the
    honour of their women against any kidnapper who chooses
    to take away their women."

[^28]: The instances where the non-violent resister gets
    killed or starved during the struggle are discussed in
    subsequent chapters. Also the cases where censorship
    hides or propaganda falsifies the report of events.

[^29]: W. H. R. Rivers---"Instinct and the
    Unconscious"---Cambridge University Press and Macmillan,
    New York, 1920, p.Â 93.

[^30]: W. Trotter---"Instincts of the Herd in Peace and
    War," P. 82, Macmillan, London and New York, 1916.

[^31]: See C. Baudouin---"Suggestion and Auto-Suggestion,"
    above cited. Also ibid---"Educating the Will"---Century
    Magazine, New York, July, 1929.

[^32]: Cf. T. Burrow---"The Social Basis of Consciousness"
    Kegan Paul, London, and Harcourt Brace, New York, 1927.

[^33]: At pp.Â 91-92 of his book above cited.

[^34]: Edward Alsworth Ross---"Social
    Psychology"---Macmillan, New York, 1909, at pp.Â 120,
    126, 130, 136. Cf. also Gabriel Tarde---"The Laws of
    Imitation"---Chap. 6---Trans, by E. C. Parsons, Henry
    Holt & Co., New York, 1903.

[^35]: At p.Â 30 "Autonomic Functions and the Personality."

[^36]: At p.Â 78.

[^37]: Von Clausewitz---"On War"---Trans, by Col. J. J.
    Graham, Kegan Paul, London, 1911, E. P. Dutton, New
    York, 1914, Vol. I, p.Â 99.

[^38]: Translated---Hugh Rees, Ltd., London, 1905, at p.Â 78.

[^39]: Perhaps further light may be thrown on all this by
    further study of unconscious mental processes and their
    relation to the conscious. Cf. "The Psychology of
    Emotion" by John T. MacCurdy---Kegan Paul, London, and
    Harcourt, Brace, New York, 1925.

[^40]: Von Clausewitz says, "A hostile feeling is kindled by
    the combat itself; for an act of violence which anyone
    commits upon us by order of his superior will excite in
    us a desire to retaliate and be revenged on him, sooner
    than on the superior power at whose command the act was
    done. This is human, or animal if we will, still it is
    so. We are very apt to regard the combat in theory as an
    abstract trial of strength, without any participation on
    the part of the feelings, and that is one of the
    thousand errors which theorists deliberately commit,
    because they do not see its consequences." "On
    War"---Kegan Paul, London, 1911, E. P. Dutton, New York,
    1914, Vol. I, p.Â 102.

[^41]: Cf. W. B. Pillsbury and C. L. Meade---"The Psychology
    of Language," p.Â 6---D. Appleton & Co., New York and
    London, 1928. Also E. S. Bogardus---"Fundamentals of
    Social Psychology," p.Â 114---Century Co., New York and
    London, 1924.

[^42]: See C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards---"The Meaning of
    Meaning," 2d. ed.Â rev. Kegan Paul, London, Harcourt,
    Brace, New York, 1927, especially chapters on "Sign
    Situations" and " Symbol Situations." Also, I. A.
    Richards---"Principles of Literary Criticism," Chap.
    21---ibid, 1926.

[^43]: This hypothesis of the non-violent resister may be
    compared with the various fruitful fictions described in
    "The Philosophy of 'As If'" by H. Vaihinger, trans. by
    C. K. Ogden---Kegan Paul, London, and Plarcourt, Brace,
    New York, 1924.

[^44]: Cf. "Religious Conversion" by Sante de Sanctis, Kegan
    Paul, London, and Harcourt, New York, 1927.

[^45]: Cf. I. A. Richards---"Principles of Literary
    Criticism"---Harcourt, New York, and Kegan Paul, London.

[^46]: W. H. R. Rivers---"Instinct and the
    Unconscious"---Cambridge University Press and Macmillan,
    New York, 1920. Page 54.

[^47]: Longmans Green, New York, 1924, p.Â 157 et seq.

[^48]: See page 171 of Miss Follett's book.

[^49]: Cf . John Dewey---"Force and Coercion"---26
    International Journal of Ethics, pp.Â 360-367, April,
    1916.

[^50]: Cf. Crile and Hocking previously cited.

[^51]: See W. M. Marston---"Emotions of Normal
    People"---Kegan Paul, London, and Harcourt, Brace, New
    York, 1928, Chap. 17.

[^52]: "Mechanisms of Character Formation", Macmillan, New
    York, 1916, p.Â 274. See also pp.Â 73 and 278.

[^53]: I do not mean to assert that all psychological
    repression is harmful. For example, temporary
    self-repression is involved in all training and
    discipline and probably acts to provide, as it were, a
    certain pressure of energy which is useful in carving
    out new channels of action in the direction marked out
    by the training.

[^54]: Cf. Marston, above cited, pp.Â 160-169, Chap. 13, and
    pp.Â 377-379.

[^55]: Goethe.

[^56]: See p.Â 125, chapter on Habit in his "Principles of
    Psychology", Vol. I, Henry Holt & Co., New York, 1893.

[^57]: Cf. "India and the Simon Report" by C. F. Andrews,
    Allen & Unwin, London, and Macmillan, New York, 1930.

[^58]: At pp.Â 188-191.

[^59]: W. Trotter in his "Instincts of the Herd in Peace and
    War," Macmillan, London and New York, 1916, pp.Â 123,
    125.
