# Preface

The first eleven chapters of this book are revised from
articles published in Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper,
during the first half of this year, under the title of
"Problems of the Time." In the chapters which follow, I have
more fully developed the lines of thought there begun. My
endeavor has been to present the momentous social problems
of our time, unencumbered by technicalities, and without
that abstract reasoning which some of the principles of
Political Economy require for thorough explanation. I have
spoken in this book of some points not touched upon, or but
lightly touched upon, in "Progress and Poverty," but there
are other points as to which I think it would be worth the
while of those who may be interested by this book to read
that.

**Henry George.**

**Brooklyn**, December 7, 1883.

# The Increasing Importance of Social Questions

There come moments in our lives that summon all our
powers---when we feel that, casting away illusions, we must
decide and act with our utmost intelligence and energy. So
in the lives of peoples come periods specially calling for
earnestness and intelligence.

We seem to have entered one of these periods. Over and again
have nations and civilizations been confronted with problems
which, like the riddle of the Sphinx, not to answer was to
be destroyed; but never before have problems so vast and
intricate been presented. This is not strange. That the
closing years of this century must bring up momentous social
questions follows from the material and intellectual
progress that has marked its course.

Between the development of society and the development of
species there is a close analogy. In the lowest forms of
animal life there is little difference of parts; both wants
and powers are few and simple; movement seems automatic; and
instincts are scarcely distinguishable from those of the
vegetable. So homogeneous are some of these living things,
that if cut in pieces, each piece still lives. But as life
rises into higher manifestations, simplicity gives way to
complexity, the parts develop into organs having separate
functions and reciprocal relations, new wants and powers
arise, and a greater and greater degree of intelligence is
needed to secure food and avoid danger. Did fish, bird or
beast possess no higher intelligence than the polyp, Nature
could bring them forth only to die.

This law---that the increasing complexity and delicacy of
organization which give higher capacity and increased power
are accompanied by increased wants and dangers, and require,
therefore, increased intelligence---runs through nature. In
the ascending scale of life at last comes man, the most
highly and delicately organized of animals. Yet not only do
his higher powers require for their use a higher
intelligence than exists in other animals, but without
higher intelligence he could not live. His skin is too thin;
his nails too brittle; he is too poorly adapted for running,
climbing, swimming or burrowing. Were he not gifted with
intelligence greater than that of any beast, he would perish
from cold, starve from inability to get food, or be
exterminated by animals better equipped for the struggle in
which brute instinct suffices.

In man, however, the intelligence which increases all
through nature's rising scale passes at one bound into an
intelligence so superior, that the difference seems of kind
rather than degree. In him, that narrow and seemingly
unconscious intelligence that we call instinct becomes
conscious reason, and the godlike power of adaptation and
invention makes feeble man nature's king.

But with man the ascending line stops. Animal life assumes
no higher form; nor can we affirm that, in all his
generations, man, as an animal, has a whit improved. But
progression in another line begins. Where the development of
species ends, social development commences, and that advance
of society that we call civilization so increases human
powers, that between savage and civilized man there is a
gulf so vast as to suggest the gulf between the highly
organized animal and the oyster glued to the rocks. And with
every advance upon this line new vistas open. When we try to
think what knowledge and power progressive civilization may
give to the men of the future, imagination fails.

In this progression which begins with man, as in that which
leads up to him, the same law holds. Each advance makes a
demand for higher and higher intelligence. With the
beginnings of society arises the need for social
intelligence---for that consensus of individual intelligence
which forms a public opinion, a public conscience, a public
will, and is manifested in law, institutions and
administration. As society develops, a higher and higher
degree of this social intelligence is required, for the
relation of individuals to each other becomes more intimate
and important, and the increasing complexity of the social
organization brings liability to new dangers.

In the rude beginning, each family produces its own food,
makes its own clothes, builds its own house, and, when it
moves, furnishes its own transportation. Compare with this
independence the intricate interdependence of the denizens
of a modern city. They may supply themselves with greater
certainty, and in much greater variety and abundance, than
the savage; but it is by the co-operation of thousands. Even
the water they drink, and the artificial light they use, are
brought to them by elaborate machinery, requiring the
constant labor and watchfulness of many men. They may travel
at a speed incredible to the savage; but in doing so resign
life and limb to the care of others. A broken rail, a
drunken engineer, a careless switch-man, may hurl them to
eternity. And the power of applying labor to the
satisfaction of desire passes, in the same way, beyond the
direct control of the individual. The laborer becomes but
part of a great machine, which may at any time be paralyzed
by causes beyond his power, or even his foresight. Thus does
the well-being of each become more and more dependent upon
the well-being of all---the individual more and more
subordinate to society.

And so come new dangers. The rude society resembles the
creatures that though cut into pieces will live; the highly
civilized society is like a highly organized animal: a stab
in a vital part, the suppression of a single function, is
death. A savage village may be burned and its people driven
off---but, used to direct recourse to nature, they can
maintain themselves. Highly civilized man, however,
accustomed to capital, to machinery, to the minute division
of labor, becomes helpless when suddenly deprived of these
and thrown upon nature. Under the factory system, some sixty
persons, with the aid of much costly machinery, co-operate
to the making of a pair of shoes. But, of the sixty, not one
could make a whole shoe. This is the tendency in all
branches of production, even in agriculture. How many
farmers of the new generation can use the flail? How many
farmers' wives can now make a coat from the wool? Many of
our farmers do not even make their own butter or raise their
own vegetables! There is an enormous gain in productive
power from this division of labor, which assigns to the
individual the production of but a few of the things, or
even but a small part of one of the things, he needs, and
makes each dependent upon others with whom he never comes in
contact; but the social organization becomes more sensitive.
A primitive village community may pursue the even tenor of
its life without feeling disasters which overtake other
villages but a few miles off; but in the closely knit
civilization to which we have attained, a war, a scarcity, a
commercial crisis, in one hemisphere produces powerful
effects in the other, while shocks and jars from which a
primitive community easily recovers would to a highly
civilized community mean wreck.

It is startling to think how destructive in a civilization
like ours would be such fierce conflicts as fill the history
of the past. The wars of highly civilized countries, since
the opening of the era of steam and machinery, have been
duels of armies rather than conflicts of peoples or classes.
Our only glimpse of what might happen, were passion fully
aroused, was in the struggle of the Paris Commune. And,
since 1870, to the knowledge of petroleum has been added
that of even more destructive agents. The explosion of a
little nitro-glycerine under a few water-mains would make a
great city uninhabitable; the blowing up of a few railroad
bridges and tunnels would bring famine quicker than the wall
of circumvallation that Titus drew around Jerusalem; the
pumping of atmospheric air into the gas-mains, and the
application of a match, would tear up every street and level
every house. The Thirty Years War set back civilization in
Germany; so fierce a war now would all but destroy it. Not
merely have destructive powers vastly increased, but the
whole social organization has become vastly more delicate.

In a simpler state master and man, neighbor and neighbor,
know each other, and there is that touch of the elbow which,
in times of danger, enables society to rally. But present
tendencies are to the loss of this. In London, dwellers in
one house do not know those in the next; the tenants of
adjoining rooms are utter strangers to each other. Let civil
conflict break or paralyze the authority that preserves
order and the vast population would become a terror-stricken
mob, without point of rally or principle of cohesion, and
your London would be sacked and burned by an army of
thieves. London is only the greatest of great cities. What
is true of London is true of 'New York, and in the same
measure true of the many cities whose hundreds of thousands
are steadily growing toward millions. These vast
aggregations of humanity, where he who seeks isolation may
find it more truly than in the desert; where wealth and
poverty touch and jostle; where one revels and another
starves within a few feet of each other, yet separated by as
great a gulf as that fixed between Dives in Hell and Lazarus
in Abraham's bosom---they are centers and types of our
civilization. Let jar or shock dislocate the complex and
delicate organization, let the policeman's club be thrown
down or wrested from him, and the fountains of the great
deep are opened, and quicker than ever before chaos comes
again. Strong as it may seem, our civilization is evolving
destructive forces. Not desert and forest, but city slums
and country roadsides are nursing the barbarians who may be
to the new what Hun and Vandal were to the old.

Nor should we forget that in civilized man still lurks the
savage. The men who, in past times, oppressed or revolted,
who fought to the death in petty quarrels and drunk fury
with blood, who burnt cities and rent empires, were men
essentially such as those we daily meet. Social progress has
accumulated knowledge, softened manners, refined tastes and
extended sympathies, but man is yet capable of as blind a
rage as, when clothed in skins, he fought wild beasts with a
flint. And present tendencies, in some respects at least,
threaten to kindle passions that have so often before flamed
in destructive fury.

There is in all the past nothing to compare with the rapid
changes now going on in the civilized world. It seems as
though in the European race, and in the nineteenth century,
man was just beginning to live---just grasping his tools and
becoming conscious of his powers. The snail's pace of
crawling ages has suddenly become the headlong rush of the
locomotive, speeding faster and faster. This rapid progress
is primarily in industrial methods and material powers. But
industrial changes imply social changes and necessitate
political changes. Progressive societies outgrow
institutions as children outgrow clothes. Social progress
always requires greater intelligence in the management of
public affairs; but this the more as progress is rapid and
change quicker.

And that the rapid changes now going on are bringing up
problems that demand most earnest attention may be seen on
every hand. Symptoms of danger, premonitions of violence,
are appearing all over the civilized world. Creeds are
dying, beliefs are changing; the old forces of conservatism
are melting away. Political institutions are failing, as
clearly in democratic America as in monarchical Europe.
There is growing unrest and bitterness among the masses,
whatever be the form of government, a blind groping for
escape from conditions becoming intolerable. To attribute
all this to the teachings of demagogues is like attributing
the fever to the quickened pulse. It is the new wine
beginning to ferment in old bottles. To put into a
sailing-ship the powerful engines of a first-class ocean
steamer would be to tear her to pieces with their play. So
the new powers rapidly changing all the relations of society
must shatter social and political organizations not adapted
to meet their strain.

To adjust our institutions to growing needs and changing
conditions is the task which devolves upon us. Prudence,
patriotism, human sympathy, and religious sentiment, alike
call upon us to undertake it. There is danger in reckless
change; but greater danger in blind conservatism. The
problems beginning to confront us are grave---so grave that
there is fear they may not be solved in time to prevent
great catastrophes. But their gravity comes from
indisposition to frankly recognize and boldly grapple with
them.

These dangers, which menace not one country alone, but
modern civilization itself, do but show that a higher
civilization is struggling to be born---that the needs and
the aspirations of men have outgrown conditions and
institutions that before sufficed.

A civilization which tends to concentrate wealth and power
in the hands of a fortunate few, and to make of others mere
human machines, must inevitably evolve anarchy and bring
destruction. But a civilization is possible in which the
poorest could have all the comforts and conveniences now
enjoyed by the rich; in which prisons and almshouses would
be needless, and charitable societies unthought of. Such a
civilization only waits for the social intelligence that
will adapt means to ends. Powers that might give plenty to
all are already in our hands. Though there is poverty and
want, there is, yet, seeming embarrassment from the very
excess of wealth-producing forces. "Give us but a market,"
say manufacturers, "and we will supply goods to no end!"
"Give us but work!" cry idle men!

The evils that begin to appear spring from the fact that the
application of intelligence to social affairs has not kept
pace with the application of intelligence to individual
needs and material ends. Natural science strides forward,
but political science lags. With all our progress in the
arts which produce wealth, we have made no progress in
securing its equitable distribution. Knowledge has vastly
increased; industry and commerce have been revolutionized;
but whether free trade or protection is best for a nation we
are not yet agreed. We have brought machinery to a pitch of
perfection that, fifty years ago, could not have been
imagined; but, in the presence of political corruption, we
seem as helpless as idiots. The East Hiver bridge is a
crowning triumph of mechanical skill; but to get it built a
leading citizen of Brooklyn had to carry to New York sixty
thousand dollars in a carpet-bag to bribe New York aldermen.
The human soul that thought out the great bridge is prisoned
in a crazed and broken body that lies bed-fast, and could
only watch it grow by peering through a telescope.
Nevertheless, the weight of the immense mass is estimated
and adjusted for every inch. But the skill of the engineer
could not prevent condemned wire being smuggled into the
cable.

The progress of civilization requires that more and more
intelligence be devoted to social affairs, and this not the
intelligence of the few, but that of the many. We cannot
safely leave politics to politicians, or political economy
to college professors. The people themselves must think,
because the people alone can act.

In a "journal of civilization" a professed teacher declares
the saving word for society to be that each shall mind his
own business. This is the gospel of selfishness, soothing as
soft flutes to those who, having fared well themselves,
think everybody should be satisfied. But the salvation of
society, the hope for the free, full development of
humanity, is in the gospel of brotherhood---the gospel of
Christ. Social progress makes the well-being of all more and
more the business of each; it binds all closer and closer
together in bonds from which none can escape. He who
observes the law and the proprieties, and cares for his
family, yet takes no interest in the general weal, and gives
no thought to those who are trodden under foot, save now and
then to bestow alms, is not a true Christian. Nor is he a
good citizen. The duty of the citizen is more and harder
than this.

The intelligence required for the solving of social problems
is not a mere thing of the intellect. It must be animated
with the religious sentiment and warm with sympathy for
human suffering. It must stretch out beyond self-interest,
whether it be the self-interest of the few or the many. It
must seek justice. For at the bottom of every social problem
we will find a social wrong.

# Political Dangers

The American Republic is to-day unquestionably foremost of
the nations---the van-leader of modern civilization. Of all
the great peoples of the European family, her people are the
most homogeneous, the most active and most assimilative.
Their average standard of intelligence and comfort is
higher; they have most fully adopted modern industrial
improvements, and are the quickest to utilize discovery and
invention; their political institutions are most in
accordance with modern ideas, their position exempts them
from dangers and difficulties besetting the European
nations, and a vast area of unoccupied land gives them room
to grow.

At the rate of increase so far maintained, the
English-speaking people of America will, by the close of the
century, number nearly one hundred million---a population as
large as owned the sway of Rome in her palmiest days. By the
middle of the next century---a time which children now born
will live to see---they will, at the same rate, number more
than the present population of Europe; and by its close
nearly equal the population which, at the beginning of this
century, the whole earth was believed to contain.

But the increase of power is more rapid than the increase of
population, and goes on in accelerating progression.
Discovery and invention stimulate discovery and invention;
and it is only when we consider that the industrial progress
of the last fifty years bids fair to pale before the
achievements of the next that we can vaguely imagine the
future that seems opening before the American people. The
center of wealth, of art, of luxury and learning, must pass
to this side of the Atlantic even before the center of
population. It seems as if this continent had been
reserved---shrouded for ages from the rest of the world---as
the field upon which European civilization might freely
bloom. And for the very reason that our growth is so rapid
and our progress so swift; for the very reason that all the
tendencies of modern civilization assert themselves here
more quickly and strongly than anywhere else, the problems
which modern civilization must meet, will here first fully
present themselves, and will most imperiously demand to be
thought out or fought out.

It is difficult for any one to turn from the history of the
past to think of the incomparable greatness promised by the
rapid growth of the United States without something of
awe---something of that feeling which induced Amasis of
Egypt to dissolve his alliance with the successful
Polycrates, because "the gods do not permit to mortals such
prosperity." Of this, at least, we may be certain: the
rapidity of our development brings dangers that can only be
guarded against by alert intelligence and earnest
patriotism.

There is a suggestive fact that must impress any one who
thinks over the history of past eras and preceding
civilizations. The great, wealthy and powerful nations have
always lost their freedom; it is only in small, poor and
isolated communities that Liberty has been maintained. So
true is this that the poets have always sung that Liberty
loves the rocks and the mountains; that she shrinks from
wealth and power and splendor, from the crowded city and the
busy mart. So true is this that philosophical historians
have sought in the richness ot material resources the causes
of the corruption and enslavement of peoples.

Liberty is natural. Primitive perceptions are of the equal
rights of the citizen, and political organization always
starts from this base. It is as social development goes on
that we find power concentrating, and institutions based
upon the equality of rights passing into institutions which
make the many the slaves of the few. How this is we may see.
In all institutions which involve the lodgment of governing
power there is, with social growth, a tendency to the
exaltation of their function and the centralization of their
power, and in the stronger of these institutions a tendency
to the absorption of the powers of the rest Thus the
tendency of social growth is to make government the business
of a special class. And as numbers increase and the power
and importance of each become less and less as compared with
that of all, so, for this reason, does government tend to
pass beyond the scrutiny and control of the masses. The
leader of a handful of warriors, or head man of a little
village, can only command or govern by common consent, and
any one aggrieved can readily appeal to his fellows. But
when the tribe becomes a nation and the village expands to a
populous country, the powers of the chieftain, without
formal addition, become practically much greater. For with
increase of numbers scrutiny of his acts becomes more
difficult, it is harder and harder to successfully appeal
from them, and the aggregate power which he directs becomes
irresistible as against individuals. And gradually, as power
thus concentrates, primitive ideas are lost, and the habit
of thought grows up which regards the masses as born but for
the service of their rulers.

Thus the mere growth of society involves danger of the
gradual conversion of government into something independent
of and beyond the people, and the gradual seizure of its
powers by a ruling class---though not necessarily a class
marked off by personal titles and a hereditary status, for,
as history allows, personal titles and hereditary status do
not accompany the concentration of power, but follow it. The
same methods which, in a little town where each knows his
neighbor and matters of common interest are under the common
eye, enable the citizens to freely govern themselves, may,
in a great city, as we have in many cases seen, enable an
organized ring of plunderers to gain and hold the
government. So, too, as we see in Congress, and even in our
State Legislatures, the growth of the country and the
greater number of interests make the proportion of the votes
of a representative, of which his constituents know or care
to know, less and less. And so, too, the executive and
judicial departments tend constantly to pass beyond the
scrutiny of the people.

But to the changes produced by growth are, with us, added
the changes brought about by improved industrial methods.
The tendency of steam and of machinery is to the division of
labor, to the concentration of wealth and power. Workmen are
becoming massed by hundreds and thousands in the employ of
single individuals and firms; small storekeepers and
merchants are becoming the clerks and salesmen of great
business houses; we have already corporations whose revenues
and pay-rolls belittle those of the greatest States. And
with this concentration grows the facility of combination
among these great business interests. How readily the
railroad companies, the coal operators, the steel producers,
even the match manufacturers, combine, either to regulate
prices or to use the powers of government! The tendency in
all branches of industry is to the formation of rings
against which the individual is helpless, and which exert
their power upon government whenever their interests may
thus be served.

It is not merely positively, but negatively, that great
aggregations of wealth, whether individual or corporate,
tend to corrupt government and take it out of the control of
the masses of the people. "Nothing is more timorous than a
million dollars---except two million dollars." Great wealth
always supports the party in power, no matter how corrupt it
may be. It never exerts itself for reform, for it
instinctively fears change. It never struggles against
misgovernment. When threatened by the holders of political
power it does not agitate, nor appeal to the people; it buys
them off. It is in this way, no less than by its direct
interference, that aggregated wealth corrupts government,
and helps to make politics a trade. Our organized lobbies,
both Legislative and Congressional, rely as much upon the
fears as upon the hopes of moneyed interests. When
"business" is dull, their resource is to get up a bill which
some moneyed interest will pay them to beat. So, too, these
large moneyed interests will subscribe to political funds,
on the principle of keeping on the right side of those in
power, just as the railroad companies deadhead President
Arthur when he goes to Florida to fish.

The more corrupt a government the easier wealth can use it.
Where legislation is to be bought, the rich make the laws;
where justice is to be purchased, the rich have the ear of
the courts. And if, for this reason, great wealth does not
absolutely prefer corrupt government to pure government, it
becomes none the less a corrupting influence. A community
composed of very rich and very poor falls an easy prey to
whoever can seize power. The very poor have not spirit and
intelligence enough to resist; the very rich have too much
at stake.

The rise in the United States of monstrous fortunes, the
aggregation of enormous wealth in the hands of corporations,
necessarily implies the loss by the people of governmental
control. Democratic forms may be maintained, but there can
be as much tyranny and misgovernment under democratic forms
as any other---in fact, they lend themselves most readily to
tyranny and misgovernment. Forms count for little. The
Romans expelled their kings, and continued to abhor the very
name of king. But under the name of Caesars and Emperors,
that at first meant no more than our "Boss," they crouched
before tyrants more absolute than kings. We have already,
under the popular name of "bosses," developed political
Caesars in municipalities and states. If this development
continues, in time there will come a national boss. We are
young; but we are growing. The day may arrive when the "Boss
of America" will be to the modern world what Caesar was to
the Roman world. This, at least, is certain: Democratic
government in more than name can only exist where wealth is
distributed with something like equality---where the great
mass of citizens are personally free and independent,
neither fettered by their poverty nor made subject by their
wealth. There is, after all, some sense in a property
qualification. The man who is dependent on a master for his
living is not a free man. To give the suffrage to slaves is
only to give votes to their owners. That universal suffrage
may add to, instead of decreasing, the political power of
wealth we see when mill-owners and mine-operators vote their
hands. The freedom to earn, without fear or favor, a
comfortable living, ought to go with the freedom to vote.
Thus alone can a sound basis for republican institutions be
secured. How can a man be said to have a country where he
has no right to a square inch of soil; where he has nothing
but his hands, and, urged by starvation, must bid against
his fellows for the privilege of using them? When it comes
to voting tramps, some principle has been carried to a
ridiculous and dangerous extreme. I have known elections to
be decided by the carting of paupers from the almshouse to
the polls. But such decisions can scarcely be in the
interest of good government.

Beneath all political problems lies the social problem of
the distribution of wealth. This our people do not generally
recognize, and they listen to quacks who propose to cure the
symptoms without touching the disease. "Let us elect good
men to office,--' say the quacks. Yes; let us catch little
birds by sprinkling salt on their tails!

It behooves us to look facts in the face. The experiment of
popular government in the United States is clearly a
failure. Not that it is a failure everywhere and in
everything. An experiment of this kind does not have to be
fully worked out to be proved a failure. But speaking
generally of the whole country, from the Atlantic to the
Pacific, and from the Lakes to the Gulf, our government by
the people has in large degree become, is in larger degree
becoming, government by the strong and unscrupulous.

The people, of course, continue to vote; but the people are
losing their power. Money and organization tell more and
more in elections. In some sections bribery has become
chronic, and numbers of voters expect regularly to sell
their votes. In some sections large employers regularly
bulldoze their hands into voting as *they* wish. In
municipal, State and Federal politics the power of the
"machine" is increasing. It many places it has become so
strong that the ordinary citizen has no more influence in
the government under which he lives than he would have in
China. He is, in reality, not one of the governing classes,
but one of the governed. He occasionally, in disgust, votes
for "the other man," or "the other party"; but, generally,
to find that he has only effected a change of masters, or
secured the same masters under different names. And he is
beginning to accept the situation, and to leave politics to
politicians, as something with which an honest,
self-respecting man cannot afford to meddle.

We are steadily differentiating a governing class, or rather
a class of Praetorians, who make a business of gaining
political power and then selling it. The type of the rising
party leader is not the orator or statesman of an earlier
day, but the shrewd manager, who knows how to handle the
workers, how to combine pecuniary interests, how to obtain
money and to spend it, how to gather to himself followers
and to secure their allegiance. One party machine is
becoming complementary to the other party machine, the
politicians, like the railroad managers, having discovered
that combination pays better than competition. So rings are
made impregnable and great pecuniary interests secure their
ends no matter how elections go. There are sovereign States
so completely in the hands of rings and corporations that it
seems as if nothing short of a revolutionary uprising of the
people could dispossess them. Indeed, whether the General
Government has not already passed beyond popular control may
be doubted. Certain it is that possession of the General
Government has for some time past secured possession. And
for one term, at least, the Presidential chair has been
occupied by a man not elected to it. This, of course, was
largely due to the crookedness of the man who was elected,
and to the lack of principle in his supporters.
Nevertheless, it occurred.

As for the great railroad managers, they may well say "The
people be d---d!" When they want the power of the people
they buy the people's masters. The map of the United States
is colored to show States and Territories. A map of real
political powers would ignore State lines. Here would be a
big patch representing the domains of Vanderbilt; there Jay
Gould's dominions would be brightly marked. In another place
would be set of the empire of Stanford and Huntington; in
another the newer empire of Henry Villard; the States and
parts of States that own the sway of the Pennsylvania
Central would be distinguished from those ruled by the
Baltimore and Ohio; and so on. In our National Senate,
sovereign members of the Union are supposed to be
represented; but what are more truly represented are
railroad kings and great moneyed interests, though
occasionally a mine jobber from Nevada or Colorado, not
mimical to the ruling powers, is suffered to buy himself a
seat for glory. And the Bench as well as the Senate is being
filled with corporation henchmen. A railroad king makes his
attorney a judge of last resort, as the great lord used to
make his chaplain a bishop.

We do not get even cheap government. We might keep a royal
family, house them in palaces like Versailles or Sans Souci,
provide them with courts and guards, masters of robes and
rangers of parks, let them give balls more costly than
Mrs. Vanderbilt's, and build yachts finer than Jay Gould's,
for much less than is wasted and stolen under our nominal
government of the people. What a noble income would be that
of a Duke of New York, a Marquis of Philadelphia, or a Count
of San Francisco, who would administer the government of
these municipalities for 50% of present waste and stealage!
Unless we got an aesthetic Chinook, where could we get an
absolute ruler who would erect such a monument of
extravagant vulgarity as the new Capitol of the State of New
York? While, as we saw in the Congress just adjourned, the
benevolent gentlemen whose desire it is to protect us
against the pauper labor of Europe quarrel over their
respective shares of the spoil with as little regard for the
taxpayer as a pirate crew would have for the consignees of a
captured vessel.

The people are largely conscious of all this, and there is
among the masses much dissatisfaction. But there is a lack
of that intelligent interest necessary to adapt political
organization to changing conditions. The popular idea of
reform seems to be merely a change of men or a change of
parties, not a change of system. Political children, we
attribute to bad men or wicked parties what really springs
from deep general causes. Our two great political parties
have really nothing more to propose than the keeping or the
taking of the offices from the other party. On their
outskirts are the Greenbackers, who, with a more or less
definite idea of what they want to do with the currency,
represent vague social dissatisfaction civil service
reformers, who hope to accomplish a political reform while
keeping it out of politics; and anti-monopolists, who
propose to tie up locomotives with pack thread. Even the
labor organizations seem to fear to go further in their
platforms than some such propositions as eight-hour laws,
bureaus of labor statistics, mechanics' liens, and
prohibition of prison contracts.

All this shows want of grasp and timidity of thought. It is
not by accident that government grows corrupt and passes out
of the hands of the people. If we would really make and
continue this a government of the people, for the people and
by the people, we must give to our politics earnest
attention; we must be prepared to review our opinions, to
give up old ideas and to accept new ones.

We must abandon prejudice, and make our reckoning with free
minds. The sailor, who, no matter how the wind might change,
should persist in keeping his vessel under the same sail and
on the same tack, would never reach his haven.

# Coming Increase of Social Pressure

The trees, as I write, have not yet begun to leaf, nor even
the blossoms to appear; yet, passing down the lower part of
Broadway these early days of spring, one breasts a steady
current of uncouthly-dressed men and women, carrying bundles
and boxes and all manner of baggage. As the season advances,
the human current will increase; even in winter it will not
wholly cease its flow. It is the great gulf-stream of
humanity which sets from Europe upon America---the greatest
migration of peoples since the world began. Other minor
branches has the stream. Into Boston and Philadelphia, into
Portland, Quebec and Montreal, into New Orleans, Galveston,
San Francisco and Victoria, come offshoots of the same
current; and as it flows it draws increasing volume from
wider sources. Emigration to America has, since 1848,
reduced the population of Ireland by more than a third; but
as Irish ability to feed the stream declines, English
emigration increases; the German outpour becomes so vast as
to assume the first proportions, and the millions of Italy,
pressed by want as severe as that of Ireland, begin to turn
to the emigrant ship as did the Irish. In Castle Garden one
may see the garb and hear the speech of all European
peoples. From the fjords of Norway, from the plains of
Russia and Hungary, from the mountains of Wallachia, and
from Mediterranean shores and islands, once the center of
classic civilization, the great current is fed. Every year
increases the facility of its flow. Year by year
improvements in steam navigation are practically reducing
the distance between the two continents; year by year
European railroads are making it easier for interior
populations to reach the seaboard, and the telegraph, the
newspaper, the schoolmaster and the cheap post, are
lessening those objections of ignorance and sentiment to
removal that are so strong with people long rooted in one
place. Yet, in spite of this great exodus, the population of
Europe, as a whole, is steadily increasing.

And across the continent, from east to west, from the older
to the newer States, an even greater migration is going on.
Our people emigrate more readily than those of Europe, and
increasing as European immigration is, it is yet becoming a
less and less important factor of our growth, as compared
with the natural increase of our population. At Chicago and
St. Paul, Omaha and Kansas City, the volume of the westward
moving current has increased, not diminished. From what, so
short a time ago, was the new West of unbroken prairie and
native forest, goes on, as children grow up, a constant
migration to a newer West.

This westward expansion of population has gone on steadily
since the first settlement of the Eastern shore. It has been
the great distinguishing feature in the conditions of our
people. Without its possibility we would have been in
nothing what we are. Our higher standard of wages and of
comfort and of average intelligence, our superior
self-reliance, energy, inventiveness, adaptability and
assimilative power, spring as directly from this possibility
of expansion as does our unprecedented growth. All that we
are proud of in national life and national character comes
primarily from our background of unused land. We are but
transplanted Europeans, and, for that matter, mostly of the
"inferior classes." It is not usually those whose position
is comfortable and whose prospects are bright who emigrate;
it is those who are pinched and dissatisfied, those to whom
no prospect seems open. There are heralds' colleges in
Europe that drive a good business in providing a certain
class of Americans with pedigrees and coats-of-arms; but it
is probably well for this sort of self-esteem that the
majority of us cannot truly trace our ancestry very far. We
had some Pilgrim Fathers, it is true; likewise some Quaker
fathers, and other sorts of fathers; yet the majority even
of the early settlers did not come to America for "freedom
to worship God," hut because they were poor, dissatisfied,
unsuccessful, or recklessly adventurous---many because they
were evicted, many to escape imprisonment, many because they
were kidnapped, many as self-sold bond men, as indentured
apprentices, or mercenary soldiers. It is the virtue of new
soil, the freedom of opportunity given by the possibility of
expansion, that has here transmuted into wholesome human
growth material that, had it remained in Europe, might have
been degraded and dangerous, just as in Australia the same
conditions have made respected and self-respecting citizens
out of the descendants of convicts, and even out of convicts
themselves.

It may be doubted if the relation of the opening of the New
World to the development of modern civilization is yet fully
recognized. In many respects the discovery of Columbus has
proved the most important event in the history of the
European world since the birth of Christ. How important
America has been to Europe as furnishing an outlet for the
restless, the dissatisfied, the oppressed and the
down-trodden; how influences emanating from the freer
opportunities and freer life of America have reacted upon
European thought and life---we can only begin to realize
when we try to imagine what would have been the present
condition of Europe had Columbus found only a watery waste
between Europe and Asia, or even had he found here a
continent populated as India or China, or Mexico, were
populated.

And, correlatively, one of the most momentous events that
could happen to the modern world would be the ending of this
possibility of westward expansion. That it must some time
end is evident when we remember that the earth is round.

Practically, this event is near at hand. Its shadow is even
now stealing over us. Not that there is any danger of this
continent being really overpopulated. Not that there will
not be for a long time to come, even at our present rate of
growth, plenty of unused land or of land only partially
used. But to feel the results of what is called pressure of
population, to realize here pressure of the same kind that
forces European emigration upon our shores, we will not have
to wait for that. Europe to-day is not overpopulated. In
Ireland, whence we have received such an immense
immigration, not one-sixth of the soil is under cultivation,
and grass grows and beasts feed where once were populous
villages. In Scotland there is the solitude of the deer
forest and the grouse moor where a century ago were homes of
men. One may ride on the railways through the richest
agricultural districts of England and see scarcely as many
houses as in the valley of the Platte, where the buffalo
herded a few years back.

Twelve months ago, when the hedges were blooming, I passed
along a lovely English road near by the cottage of that
"Shepherd of Salisbury Plain" of whom I read, when a boy, in
a tract which is a good sample of the husks frequently given
to children as religious food, and which is still, I
presume, distributed by the American, as it is by the
English, Tract Society. On one side of the road was a wide
expanse of rich land, in which no plow-share had that season
been struck, because its owner demanded a higher rent than
the farmers would give. On the other, stretched, for many a
broad acre, a lordly park, its velvety verdure untrodden
save by a few light-footed deer. And, as we passed along, my
companion, a native of those parts, bitterly complained
that, since this lord of the manor had enclosed the little
village green and set out his fences to take in the grass of
the roadside, the cottagers could not keep even a goose, and
the children of the village had no place to play! Place
there was in plenty, but, so far as the children were
concerned, it might as well be in Africa or in the moon. And
so in our Far West, I have seen emigrants toiling painfully
for long distances through vacant land without finding a
spot on which they dared settle. In a country where the
springs and streams are all inclosed by walls he cannot
scale, the wayfarer, but for charity, might perish of
thirst, as in a desert. There is plenty of vacant land on
Manhattan Island. But on Manhattan Island human beings are
packed closer than anywhere else in the world. There is
plenty of fresh air all around---one man owns forty acres of
it, a whiff of which he never breathes, since his home is on
his yacht in European waters; but, for all that, thousands
of children die in New York every summer for want of it, and
thousands, more would die did not charitable people
subscribe to fresh-air funds. The social pressure which
forces on our shores this swelling tide of immigration
arises not from the fact that the land of Europe is all in
use, but that it is all appropriated. That will soon be our
case as well. Our land will not all be used; but it will all
be "fenced in."

We still talk of our vast public domain, and figures showing
millions and millions of acres of unappropriated public land
yet swell grandly in the reports of our Land Office. But
already it is so difficult to find public land fit for
settlement, that the great majority of those wishing to
settle find in cheaper to buy, and rents in California and
the New Northwest run from a quarter to even one half the
crop. It must be remembered that the area which yet figures
in the returns of our public domain includes all the great
mountain chains, all the vast deserts and dry plains fit
only for grazing, or not even for that; it must be
remembered that of what is really fertile, millions and
millions of acres are covered by railroad grants as yet
unpatented, or what amounts to the same thing to the
settler, are shadowed by them; that much is held by
appropriation of the water without which it is useless; and
that much more is held under claims of various kinds, which,
whether legal or illegal, are sufficient to keep the settler
off unless he will consent to pay a price, or to mortgage
his labor for years.

Nevertheless, land with us is still comparatively cheap. But
this cannot long continue. The stream of immigration that
comes swelling in, added to our steadily augmenting natural
increase, will soon now so occupy the available lands as to
raise the price of the poorest land worth settling on to a
point we have never known. Nearly twenty years ago Mr. Wade,
of Ohio, in a speech in the United States Senate, predicted
that by the close of the century every acre of good
agricultural land in the Union would be worth at least \$50.
That his prediction will be even more than verified we may
already see. By the close of the century our population, at
the normal rate of increase, will be over forty millions
more than in 1880. That is to say, within the next seventeen
years an additional population greater than that of the
whole United States at the close of the civil war will be
demanding room. Where will they find cheap land? There is no
further West. Our advance has reached the Pacific, and
beyond the Pacific is the East, with its teeming millions.
From San Diego to Puget Sound there is no valley of the
coast-line that is not settled or pre-empted. To the very
farthest corners of the Republic settlers are already going.
The pressure is already so great that speculation and
settlement are beginning to cross the northern border into
Canada and the southern border into Mexico; so great that
land is being settled and is becoming valuable that a few
years ago would have been rejected---land where winter lasts
for six months and the thermometer goes down into the
forties below zero; land where, owing to insufficient
rainfall, a crop is always a risk: land that cannot be
cultivated at all without irrigation. The vast spaces of the
western half of the continent do not contain anything like
the proportion of arable land that does the eastern. The
"great American desert" yet exists, though not now marked
upon our maps. There is not to-day remaining in the United
States any considerable body of good land unsettled and
unclaimed, upon which settlers can go with the prospect of
finding a homestead on Government terms. Already the tide of
settlement presses angrily upon the Indian reservations, and
but for the power of the general government would sweep over
them. Already, although her population is as yet but a
fraction more than six to the square mile, the last acre of
the vast public domain of Texas has passed into private
hands, the rush to purchase during the past year having been
such that many thousands of acres more than the State had
were sold.

We may see what is coming by the avidity with which
capitalists, and especially foreign capitalists, who realize
what is the value of land where none is left over which
population may freely spread, are purchasing land in the
United States. This movement has been going on quietly for
some years, until now there is scarcely a rich English peer
or wealthy English banker who does not, either individually
or as the member of some syndicate, own a great tract of our
new land, and the purchase of large bodies for foreign
account is going on every day. It is with these absentee
landlords that our coming millions must make terms.

Nor must it be forgotten that, while our population is
increasing, and our "wild lands" are being appropriated, the
productive capacity of our soil is being steadily reduced,
which, practically, amounts to the same thing as reducing
its quantity. Speaking generally, the agriculture of the
United States is an exhaustive agriculture. We do not return
to the earth what we take from it; each crop that is
harvested leaves the soil the poorer. We are cutting down
forests which we do not replant; we are shipping abroad, in
wheat and cotton and tobacco and meat, or flushing into the
sea through the sewers of our great cities, the elements of
fertility that have been embedded in the soil by the slow
processes of nature, acting for long ages.

The day is near at hand when it will be no longer possible
for our increasing population to freely expand over new
land; when we shall need for our own millions the immense
surplus of foodstuffs now exported; when we shall not only
begin to feel that social pressure which comes when natural
resources are all monopolized, but when increasing social
pressure here will increase social pressure in Europe. How
momentous is this fact we begin to realize when we cast
about for such another outlet as the United States has
furnished. We look in vain. The British possessions to the
north of us embrace comparatively little arable land; the
valleys of the Saskatchewan and the Ked River are being
already taken up, and land speculation is already raging
there in fever. Mexico offers opportunities for American
enterprise and American capital and American trade, but
scarcely for American emigration. There is some room for our
settlers in that northern zone that has been kept desolate
by fierce Indians; but it is very little. The table-land of
Mexico and those portions of Central and South America
suited to our people are already well filled by a population
whom we cannot displace unless, as the Saxons displaced the
ancient Britons, by a war of extermination. Anglo-Saxon
capital and enterprise and influence will doubtless dominate
those regions, and many of our people will go there; but it
will be as Englishmen go to India or British Guinea. "Where
land is already granted and where peon labor can be had for
a song, no such emigration can take place as that which has
been pushing its way westward over the United States. So of
Africa. Our race has made a permanent lodgment on the
southern extremity of that vast continent, but its northern
advance is met by tropical heats and the presence of races
of strong vitality. On the north, the Latin branches of the
European family seem to have again become acclimated, and
will probably in time revive the ancient populousness and
importance of Mediterranean Africa; but it will scarcely
furnish an outlet for more than them. As for Equatorial
Africa, though we may explore, and civilize and develop, we
cannot colonize it in the face of the climate and of races
that increase rather than disappear in presence of the white
man. The arable land of Australia would not merely be soon
well populated by anything like the emigration that Europe
is pouring on America, but there the forestalling of land
goes on as rapidly as here. Thus we come again to that
greatest of the continents, from which our race once started
on its westward way, Asia---mother of peoples and
religions---which yet contains the greater part of the human
race---millions who live and die in all but utter
unconsciousness of our modern world. In the awakening of
those peoples by the impact of Western civilization lies one
of the greatest problems of the future.

But it is not my purpose to enter into such speculations.
What I want to point out is that we are very soon to lose
one of the most important conditions under which our
civilization has been developing---that possibility of
expansion over virgin soil that has given scope and freedom
to American life, and relieved social pressure in the most
progressive European nations. Tendencies, harmless under
this condition, may become most dangerous when it is
changed. Gunpowder does not explode until it is confined.
You may rest your hand on the slowly ascending jaw of a
hydraulic press. It will only gently raise it. But wait a
moment till it meets resistance!

# Two Opposing Tendencies

So much freer, so much higher, so much fuller and wider is
the life of our time, that, looking back, we cannot help
feeling something like pity, if not contempt, for preceding
generations.

Comforts, conveniences, luxuries, that a little while ago
wealth could not purchase, are now matters of ordinary use.
We travel in an hour, easily and comfortably, what to our
fathers was a hard day's journey; we send in minutes
messages that, in their time, would have taken weeks. We are
better acquainted with remote countries than they with
regions little distant; we know as common things what to
them were fast-locked secrets of nature; our world is
larger, our horizon is wider; in the years of our lives we
may see more, do more, learn more.

Consider the diffusion of knowledge, the quickened
transmission of information. Compare the school-books used
by our children with the school-books used by our fathers;
see how cheap printing has brought within the reach of the
masses the very treasures of literature; how enormously it
has widened the audience of the novelist, the historian, the
essayist and the poet; see how superior are even the trashy
novels and story-papers in which shop-girls delight, to the
rude ballads and "last dying speeches and confessions,"
which were their prototypes. Look at the daily newspapers,
read even by the poorest, and giving to them glimpses of the
doings of all classes of society, news from all parts of the
world. Consider the illustrated journals that every week
bring to the million pictures of life in all phases and in
all countries---bird's-eye views of cities, of grand and
beautiful landscapes; the features of noted men and women;
the sittings of parliaments, and congresses, and
conventions; the splendor of courts, and the wild life of
savages; triumphs of art; glories of architecture; processes
of industry; achievements of inventive skill. Such a
panorama as thus, week after week, passes before the eyes of
common men and women, the richest and most powerful could
not a generation ago have commanded.

These things, and the many other things that the mention of
these will suggest, are necessarily exerting a powerful
influence upon thought and feeling. Superstitions are dying
out, prejudices are giving way, manners and customs are
becoming assimilated, sympathies are widening, new
aspirations are quickening the masses.

We come into the world with minds ready to receive any
impression. To the eyes of infancy all is new, and one thing
is no more wonderful than another. In whatever lies beyond
common experience we assume the beliefs of those about us,
and it is only the strongest intellects that can in a little
raise themselves above the accepted opinions of their times.
In a community where that opinion prevailed, the vast
majority of us would as unhesitatingly believe that the
earth is a plain, supported by a gigantic elephant, as we
now believe it a sphere circling round the sun. No theory is
too false, no fable too absurd, no superstition too
degrading for acceptance when it has become embedded in
common belief. Men will submit themselves to tortures and to
death, mothers will immolate their children, at the bidding
of beliefs they thus accept. What more unnatural than
polygamy? Yet see how long and how widely polygamy has
existed!

In this tendency to accept what we find, to believe what we
are told, is at once good and evil. It is this which makes
social advance possible; it is this which makes it so slow
and painful. Each generation thus obtains without effort the
hard-won knowledge bequeathed to it; it is thus, also,
enslaved by errors and perversions which it in the same way
receives.

It is thus that tyranny is maintained and superstition
perpetuated. Polygamy is unnatural. Obvious facts of
universal experience prove this. The uniform proportion in
which the sexes are brought into the world; the
exclusiveness of the feeling with which in healthy
conditions they attract each other; the necessities imposed
by the slow growth and development of children, point to the
union of one man with one woman as the intent of Nature.
Yet, although it is repugnant to the most obvious facts and
to the strongest instincts, polygamy seems a perfectly
natural thing to those educated in a society where it has
become an accepted institution, and it is only by long
effort and much struggling that this idea can be eradicated.
So with slavery. Even to such minds as those of Plato and
Aristotle, to own a man seemed as natural as to own a horse.
Even in this nineteenth century and in this "land of
liberty," how long has it been since those who denied the
right of property in human flesh and blood were denounced as
"communists," as "infidels," as "incendiaries," bent on
uprooting social order and destroying all property rights.
So with monarchy, so with aristocracy, so with many other
things as unnatural that are still unquestioningly accepted.
Can anything be more unnatural---that is to say, more
repugnant to right reason and to the facts and laws of
nature---than that those who work least should get most of
the things that work produces? "He that will not work,
neither shall lie eat." That is not merely the word of the
Apostle; it is the obvious law of Nature. Yet all over the
world, hard and poor is the fare of the toiling masses;
while those who aid production neither with hand nor head
live luxuriously and fare sumptuously. This we have been
used to, and it has therefore seemed to us natural, just as
polygamy, slavery, aristocracy and monarchy seem natural to
those accustomed to them.

But mental habits which made this state of things seem
natural are breaking up; superstitions which prevented its
being questioned are melting away. The revelations of
physical science, the increased knowledge of other times and
other peoples, the extension of education, emigration,
travel, the rise of the critical spirit and the changes in
old methods everywhere going on, are destroying beliefs
which made the masses of men content with the position of
hewers of wood and drawers of water, are softening manners
and widening sympathies, are extending the idea of human
equality and brotherhood.

All over the world the masses of men are becoming more and
more dissatisfied with conditions under which their fathers
would have been contented. It is in vain that they are told
that their situation has been much improved; it is in vain
that it is pointed out to them that comforts, amusements,
opportunities, are within their reach that their fathers
would not have dreamed of. The having got so much, only
leads them to ask why they should not have more. Desire
grows by what it feeds on. Man is not like the ox. He has no
fixed standard of satisfaction. To arouse his ambition, to
educate him to new wants, is as certain to make him
discontented with his lot as to make that lot harder. We
resign ourselves to what we think cannot be bettered; but
when we realize that improvement is possible, then we become
restive. This is the explanation of the paradox that De
Tocqueville thought astonishing: that the masses find their
position the more intolerable the more it is improved. The
slave codes were wise that prescribed pains and penalties
for teaching bondsmen to read, and they reasoned well who
opposed popular education on the ground that it would bring
revolution.

But there is in the conditions of the civilized world to-day
something more portentous than a growing restiveness under
evils long endured. Everything tends to awake the sense of
natural equality, to arouse the aspirations and ambitions of
the masses, to excite a keener and keener perception of the
gross injustice of existing inequalities of privilege and
wealth. Yet, at the same time, everything tends to the rapid
and monstrous increase of these inequalities. Never since
great estates were eating out the heart of Rome has the
world seen such enormous fortunes as are now arising. And
never more utter proletarians. In the paper which contained
a many-column account of the Vanderbilt ball, with its
gorgeous dresses and its wealth of diamonds, with its
profusion of roses, costing \$2 each, and its precious wines
flowing like water, I also read a brief item telling how, at
a station-house near by, thirty-nine persons---eighteen of
them women---had sought shelter, and how they were all
marched into court next morning and sent for six months to
prison. "The women," said the item, "shrieked and sobbed
bitterly as they were carried to prison." Christ was born of
a woman. And to Mary Magdalen he turned in tender blessing.
But such vermin have some of these human creatures, made in
God's image, become, that we must shovel them off to prison
without being too particular.

The railroad is a new thing. It has scarcely begun its work.
Yet it has already differentiated the man who counts his
income by millions every month, and the thousands of men
glad to work for him at from 90 cents to \$1.50 a day. Who
shall set bounds, under present tendencies, to the great
fortunes of the next generation? Or to the correlatives of
these great fortunes, the tramps?

The tendency of all the inventions and improvements so
wonderfully augmenting productive power is to concentrate
enormous wealth in the hands of a few, to make the condition
of the many more hopeless; to force into the position of
machines for the production of wealth they are not to enjoy,
men whose aspirations are being aroused. Without a single
exception that I can think of, the effect of all modern
industrial improvements is to production upon a large scale,
to the minute division of labor, to the giving to the
possession of large capital an overpowering advantage. Even
such inventions as the telephone and the type-writer tend to
the concentration of wealth, by adding to the ease with
which large businesses can be managed, and lessening
limitations that after a certain point made further
extension more difficult.

The tendency of the machine is in every thing not merely to
place it out of the power of the workman to become his own
employer, but to reduce him to the position of a mere
attendant or feeder; to dispense with judgment, skill and
brains, save in a few overseers; to reduce all others to the
monotonous work of automatons, to which there is no future
save the same unvarying round.

Under the old system of handicraft, the workman may have
toiled hard and long, but in his work he had companionship,
variety, the pleasure that comes of the exercise of creative
skill, the sense of seeing things growing under his hand to
finished form. He worked in his own home or side by side
with his employer. Labor was lightened by emulation, by
gossip, by laughter, by discussion. As apprentice, he looked
forward to becoming a journeyman; as a journeyman, lie
looked forward to becoming a master and taking an apprentice
of his own. With a few tools and a little raw material he
was independent. He dealt directly with those who used the
finished articles he produces. If he could not find a market
for money he could find a market in exchange. That terrible
dread---the dread of having the opportunities of livelihood
shut off; of finding himself utterly helpless to provide for
his family, never cast its shadow over him.

Consider the blacksmith of the industrial era now everywhere
passing---or rather the "black and white smith," for the
finished workman worked in steel as well. The smithy stood
by roadside or street. Through its open doors were caught
glimpses of nature; all that was passing could be seen.
Wayfarers stopped to inquire, neighbors to tell or hear the
news, children to see the hot iron glow and watch the red
sparks fly. Now the smith shoed a horse; now he put on a
wagon-tire; now he forged and tempered a tool; again he
welded a broken andiron, or beat out with graceful art a
crane for the deep chimney-place, or, when there was nothing
else to do, he wrought iron into nails.

Go now into one of those enormous establishments covering
acres and acres, in which workmen by the thousand are massed
together, and, by the aid of steam and machinery, iron is
converted to its uses at a fraction of the cost of the old
system. You cannot enter without permission from the office,
for over each door you will find the sign, "Positively no
admittance." If you are permitted to go in, you must not
talk to the workmen; but that makes little difference, as
amid the din and the clatter, and whirr of belts and wheels,
you could not if you would. Here you find men doing over and
over the selfsame thing---passing, all day long, bars of
iron through great rollers; presenting plates to steel jaws,
turning, amid clangor in which you can scarcely "hear
yourself think," bits of iron over and back again, sixty
times a minute, for hour after hour, for day after day, for
year after year. In the whole great establishment there will
be not a man, save here and there one who got his training
under the simpler system now passing away, who can do more
than some minute part of what goes to the making of a
salable article. The lad learns in a little while how to
attend his particular machine. Then his progress stops. He
may become gray-headed without learning more. As his
children grow, the only way he has of augmenting his income
is by setting them to work. As for aspiring to become master
of such an establishment, with its millions of capital in
machinery and stock, he might as well aspire to be King of
England or Pope of Rome. He has no more control over the
conditions that give him employment than has the passenger
in a railroad-car over the motion of the train. Causes which
he can neither prevent nor foresee may at any time stop his
machine and throw him upon the world, an utterly unskilled
laborer, unaccustomed even to swing a pick or handle a
spade. When times are good, and his employer is coining
money, he can only get an advance by a strike or a
threatened strike. At the least symptoms of harder times his
wages are scaled down, and he can only resist by a strike,
which means, for a longer or shorter time, no wages.

I have spoken of but one trade; but the tendency is the same
in all others. This is the form that industrial organization
is everywhere assuming, even in agriculture. Great
corporations are now stocking immense ranges with cattle,
and "bonanza farms" are cultivated by gangs of nomads
destitute of anything that can be called home. In all
occupations the workman is steadily becoming divorced from
the tools and opportunities of labor; everywhere the
inequalities of fortune are becoming more glaring. And this
at a time when thought is being quickened; when the old
forces of conservatism are giving way; when the idea of
human equality is growing and spreading.

When between those who work and want and those who live in
idle luxury there is so great a gulf fixed that in popular
imagination they seem to belong to distinct orders of
beings; when, in the name of religion, it is persistently
instilled into the masses that all things in this world are
ordered by Divine Providence, which appoints to each his
place; when children are taught from the earliest infancy
that it is, to use the words of the Episcopal catechism,
their duty toward God and man to "honor and obey the civil
authority," to "order themselves lowly and reverently toward
their betters, and to do their duty in that state of life in
which it has pleased God to call them"; when these counsels
of humility, of contentment and of self-abasement are
enforced by the terrible threat of an eternity of torture,
while on the other hand the poor are taught to believe that
if they patiently bear their lot here God will after death
translate them to a heaven where there is no private
property and no poverty, the most glaring inequalities in
condition may excite neither envy nor indignation.

But the ideas that are stirring in the world to-day are
different from these.

Near nineteen hundred years ago, when another civilization
was developing monstrous inequalities, when the masses
everywhere were being ground into hopeless slavery, there
arose in a Jewish village an unlearned carpenter, who,
scorning the orthodoxies and rituals of the time, preached
to laborers and fishermen the gospel of the fatherhood of
God, of the equality and brotherhood of men, who taught his
disciples to pray for the coming of the kingdom of heaven on
earth. The college professors sneered at him, the orthodox
preachers denounced him. He was reviled as a dreamer, as a
disturber, as a "communist," and, finally, organized society
took the alarm, and he was crucified between two thieves.
But the word went forth, and, spread by fugitives and
slaves, made its way against power and against persecution
till it revolutionized the world, and out of the rotting old
civilization brought the germ of the new. Then the
privileged classes rallied again, carved the effigy of the
man of the people in the courts and on the tombs of kings,
in his name consecrated inequality, and wrested his gospel
to the defense of social injustice. But again the same great
ideas of a common fatherhood, of a common brotherhood, of a
social state in which none shall be overworked and none
shall want, begin to quicken in common thought.

"When a mighty wind meets a strong current, it does not
portend a smooth sea. And whoever will think of the opposing
tendencies beginning to develop will appreciate the gravity
of the social problems the civilized world must soon meet.
He will also understand the meaning of Christ's words when
he said:

> "Think not I am come to send peace on earth. I come not to
> send peace, hut a sword."

# The March of Concentration

In 1790, at the time of the first census of the United
States, the cities contained but 3.3% of the whole
population. In 18S0 the cities contained 22.5% of the
population. This tendency of population to concentrate is
one of the marked features of our time. All over the
civilized world the great cities are growing even faster
than the growth of population. The increase in the
population of England and Scotland during the present
century has been in the cities. In France, where population
is nearly stationary, the large cities are year by year
becoming larger. In Ireland, where population is steadily
declining, Dublin and Belfast are steadily growing.

The same great agencies---steam and machinery---that are
thus massing population in cities are operating even more
powerfully to concentrate industry and trade. This is to be
seen wherever the new forces have had play, and in every
branch of industry, from such primary ones as agriculture,
stock-raising, mining and fishing, up to those created by
recent invention, such as railroading, telegraphing, or the
lighting by gas or electricity.

It has been stated on the authority of the United States
Census Bureau that the average size of farms is decreasing
in the United States. This statement is not only
inconsistent with facts obvious all over the United States,
and with the tendencies of agriculture in other countries,
such as Great Britain, but it is inconsistent with the
returns furnished by the Census Bureau itself According to
the "Compendium of the Tenth Census," the increase of the
number of farms in the United States during the decade
between 1870 and 1880 was about 50%, and the returns in the
eight classes of farms enumerated show a steady diminution
in the smaller sized farms and a steady increase in the
larger. In the class under three acres, the decrease during
the decade was about 37%; between three and ten acres, about
21%; between ten and twenty acres, about 14%; between twenty
and fifty acres, something less than 8%. With the class
between 50 and 100 acres, the increase begins, amounting in
this class to about 37%. In the next class, between 100 and
500 acres, the increase is nearly 200%. In the class between
500 and 1,000 acres, it is nearly 400%. In the class over
1,000 acres, the largest given, it amounts to almost 700%.

How, in the face of these figures, the Census Bureau can
report a decline in the average size of farms in the United
States from 153 acres in 1870 to 134 acres in 1880 I cannot
understand. Nor is it worth while here to inquire. The
incontestable fact is that, like everything else, the
ownership of land is concentrating, and farming is assuming
a larger scale. This is due to the improvements in
agricultural machinery, which make farming a business
requiring more capital, to the enhanced value of land, to
the changes produced by railroads, and the advantage which
special rates give the large over the small producer. That
it is an accelerating tendency there is no question. The new
era in farming is only beginning. And whatever be its gains,
it involves the reduction of the great body of American
farmers to the ranks of tenants or laborers. There are no
means of discovering the increase of tenant farming in the
United States during the last decade, as no returns as to
tenantry were made prior to the last census; but that shows
that there were in the United States in 1880 no less than
1,024,601 tenant farmers. If, in addition to this, we could
get at the number of farmers nominally owning their own
land, but who are in reality paying rent in the shape of
interest on mortgages, the result would be astounding.

How in all other branches of industry the same process is
going on, it is scarcely necessary to speak. It is
everywhere obvious that the independent mechanic is becoming
an operative, the little storekeeper a salesman in a big
store, the small merchant a clerk or bookkeeper, and that
men, under the old system independent, are being massed in
the employ of great firms and corporations. But the effect
of this is scarcely realized. A large class of people,
including many professed public teachers, are constantly
talking as though energy, industry and economy were alone
necessary to business success---are constantly pointing to
the fact that men who began with nothing are now rich, as
proof that any one can begin with nothing and get rich.

That most of our rich men did begin with nothing is true.
But that the same success could be as easily won now is not
true. Times of change always afford opportunities for the
rise of individuals, which disappear when social relations
are again adjusted. We have not only been overrunning a new
continent, but the introduction of steam and the application
of machinery have brought about industrial changes such as
the world never before saw.

When William the Conqueror parceled out England among his
followers, a feudal aristocracy was created out of an army
of adventurers. But when society had hardened again, a
hereditary nobility had formed into which no common man
could hope to win his way, and the descendants of William's
adventurers looked down upon men of their father's class as
upon beings formed of inferior clay. So when a new country
is rapidly settling, those who come while land is cheap and
industry and trade are in process of organization have
opportunities that those who start from the same plane when
land has become valuable and society has formed cannot have.

The rich men of the first generation in a new country are
always men who started with nothing, but the rich men of
subsequent generations are generally those who inherited
their start. In the United States, when we hear of a wealthy
man, we naturally ask, "How did he make his money?" for the
presumption, over the greater part of the country, is that
he acquired it himself. In England they do not ordinarily
ask that question---there the presumption is that he
inherited it. But, though the soil of England was parceled
out long ago, the great changes consequent upon the
introduction of steam and machinery have there, as here,
opened opportunities to rise from the ranks of labor to
great wealth. Those of opportunities are now closed or
closing. When a railroad train is slowly moving off, a
single step may put one on it. But in a few minutes those
who have not taken that step may run themselves out of
breath in the hopeless endeavor to overtake the train. It is
absurd to think that it is easy to stop aboard a train at
full speed because those who got on board at starting did so
easily. So is it absurd to think that opportunities open
when steam and machinery were beginning their concentrating
work will remain open.

An English friend, a wealthy retired Manchester
manufacturer, once told me the story of his life. How he
went to work at eight years of age helping make twine, when
twine was made entirely by hand. How, when a young man, he
walked to Manchester, and having got credit for a bale of
flax, made it into twine and sold it. How, building up a
little trade, he got others to work for him. How, when
machinery began to be invented and steam was introduced, he
took advantage of them, until he had a big factory and made
a fortune, when he withdrew to spend the rest of his days at
ease, leaving his business to his son.

"Supposing you were a young man now," said I, "could you
walk into Manchester and do that again?"

"No," replied he; "no one could. I couldn't with fifty
thousand pounds in place of my five shillings."

So in every branch of business in which the new agencies
have begun to reach anything like development. Leland
Stanford drove an ox-team to California; Henry Villard came
here from Germany a poor boy, became a newspaper reporter,
and rode a mule from Kansas City to Denver when the plains
were swarming with Indians---a thing no one with a bank
account would do. Stanford and his associates got hold of
the Central Pacific enterprise, with its government
endowments, and are now masters of something like twelve
thousand miles of rail, millions of acres of land, steamship
lines, express companies, banks and newspapers, to say
nothing of legislatures, congressmen, judges, etc. So Henry
Villard, by a series of fortunate accidents, which he had
energy and tact to improve, got hold of the Oregon Steam
Navigation combination, and of the Northern Pacific
endowment, and has become the railroad king of the immense
domain north of the Stanford dominions, having likewise his
thousands of miles of road, millions of acres of land, his
newspapers, political servitors, and literary brushers-off
of files, and being able to bring over a shipload of lords
and barons to see him drive a golden spike.

Now, it is not merely that such opportunities as these which
have made the Stanfords and Villards so great, come only
with the opening of new countries and the development of new
industrial agents; but that the rise of the Stanfords and
Villards makes impossible the rise of others such as they.
Whoever now starts a railroad within the domains of either
must become subordinate and tributary to them. The great
railroad king alone can fight the great railroad king, and
control of the railroad system not only gives the railroad
kings control of branch roads, of express companies, stage
lines, steamship lines, etc., not only enables them to make
or unmake the smaller towns, but it enables them to "size
the pile" of any one who develops a business requiring
transportation, and to transfer to their own pockets any
surplus beyond what, after careful consideration, they think
he ought to make. The rise of these great powers is like the
growth of a great tree, which draws the moisture from the
surrounding soil, and stunts all other vegetation by its
shade.

So, too, does concentration operate in all businesses. The
big mill crushes out the little mill. The big store
undersells the little store till it gets rid of its
competition. On the top of the building of the American News
Company, on Chambers street, New York, stands a newsboy
carved in marble. It was in this way that the managing man
of that great combination began. But what was at first the
union of a few sellers of newspapers for mutual convenience
has become such a powerful concern, that combination after
combination, backed with capital and managed with skill,
have gone down in the attempt to break or share its
monopoly. The newsboy may look upon the statue that crowns
the building as the young Englishman who goes to India to
take a clerical position may look upon the statue of Lord
Clive. It is a lesson and an incentive, to be sure; but just
as Clive's victories, by establishing the English dominion
in India, made such a career as his impossible again, so
does the success of such a concern as the American News
Company make it impossible for men of small capital to
establish another such business.

So may the printer look upon the *Tribune* building, or the
newspaper writer upon that of the *Herald*. A Greeley or a
Bennett could no longer hope to establish a first-class
paper in New York, or to get control of one already
established, unless he got a Jay Gould to back him. Even in
our newest cities the day has gone by when a few printers
and a few writers could combine and start a daily paper. To
say nothing of the close corporation of the Associated
Press, the newspaper has become an immense machine,
requiring large capital, and for the most part it is written
by literary operatives, who must write to suit the
capitalist that controls it.

In the last generation a full-rigged Indiaman would be
considered a very large vessel if she registered 500 tons.
Now we are building coasting schooners of 1,000 tons. It is
not long since our first-class ocean steamers were of 1,200
or 1,500 tons. Now the crack steamers of the transatlantic
route are rising to 10,000 tons. Not merely are there
relatively fewer captains, but the chances of modern
captains are not as good. The captain of a great
transatlantic steamer recently told me that he got no more
pay now than when as a young man he commanded a small
sailing-ship. Nor is there now any "primage," any "venture,"
any chance of becoming owner as well as captain of one of
these great steamers.

Under any condition of things short of a rigid system of
hereditary caste, there will, of course, always be men who,
by force of great abilities and happy accidents, win their
way from poverty to wealth, and from low to high position;
but the strong tendencies of the time are to make this more
and more difficult. Jay Gould is probably a smarter man than
the present Vanderbilt. Had they started even, Vanderbilt
might now have been peddling mouse-traps or working for a
paltry salary as some one's clerk, while Gould counted his
scores of millions. But with all his money-making ability
Gould cannot overcome the start given by the enormous
acquisitions of the first Vanderbilt. And when the sons of
the present great money-makers take their places, the
chances of rivalry on the part of anybody else's sons will
be much less.

All the tendencies of the present are not merely to the
concentration, but to the perpetuation, of great fortunes.
There are no crusades; the habits of the very rich are not
to that mad extravagance that could dissipate such fortunes;
high play has gone out of fashion, and the gambling of the
Stock Exchange is more dangerous to short than to long
purses. Stocks, bonds, mortgages, safe deposit and trust
companies aid the retention of large wealth, and all modern
agencies enlarge the sphere of its successful employment.

On the other hand, the mere laborer is becoming more
helpless, and small capitals find it more and more difficult
to compete with larger capitals. The greater railroad
companies are swallowing up the lesser railroad companies;
one great telegraph company already controls the telegraph
wires of the continent, and, to save the cost of buying up
more patents, pays inventors not to invent. As in England,
nearly all the public-houses have passed into the hands of
the great brewers, so, here, large firms start young men,
taking chattel mortgages on their stock. As in Great
Britain, the supplying of railway passengers with eatables
and drinkables has passed into the hands of a single great
company, and in Paris one large restaurateur, with numerous
branches, is taking the trade of the smaller ones, so here
the boys who sell papers and peanuts on the trains are
employees of companies, and bundles are carried and errands
run by corporations.

I am not denying that this tendency is largely to subserve
public convenience. I am merely pointing out that it exists.
A great change is going on all over the civilized world
similar to that infeudation which, in Europe, during the
rise of the feudal system, converted free proprietors into
vassals, and brought all society into subordination to a
hierarchy of wealth and privilege. Whether the new
aristocracy is hereditary or not makes little difference.
Chance alone may determine who will get the few prizes of a
lottery. But it is not the less certain that the vast
majority of all who take part in it must draw blanks. The
forces of the new era have not yet had time to make status
hereditary, but we may clearly see that when the industrial
organization compels a thousand workmen to take service
under one master, the proportion of masters to men will be
but as one to a thousand, though the one may come from the
ranks of the thousand. "Master!" We don't like the word. It
is not American! But what is the use of objecting to the
word when we have the thing. The man who gives me
employment, which I must have or suffer, that man is my
master, let me call him what I will.

# The Wrong in Existing Social Conditions

The comfortable theory that it is in the nature of things
that some should be poor and some should be rich, and that
the gross and constantly increasing inequalities in the
distribution of wealth imply no fault in our institutions,
pervades our literature, and is taught in the press, in the
church, in school and in college.

This is a free country, we are told---every man has a vote
and every man has a chance. The laborer's son may become
President; poor boys of to-day will be millionaires thirty
or forty years from now, and the millionaire's grandchildren
will probably be poor. What more can be asked? If a man has
energy, industry, prudence and foresight, he may win his way
to great wealth. If he has not the ability to do this he
must not complain of those who have. If some enjoy much and
do little, it is because they, or their parents, possessed
superior qualities which enabled them to "acquire property"
or "make money." If others must work hard and get little, it
is because they have not yet got their start, because they
are ignorant, shiftless, unwilling to practice that economy
necessary for the first accumulation of capital; or because
their fathers were wanting in these respects. The
inequalities in condition result from the inequalities of
human nature, from the difference in the powers and
capacities of different men. If one has to toil ten or
twelve hours a day for a few hundred dollars a year, while
another, doing little or no hard work, gets an income of
many thousands, it is because all that the former
contributes to the augmentation of the common stock of
wealth is little more than the mere force of his muscles. He
can expect little more than the animal, because he brings
into play little more than animal powers. He is but a
private in the ranks of the great army of industry, who has
but to stand still or march, as he is bid. The other is the
organizer, the general, who guides and wields the whole
great machine, who must think, plan and provide; and his
larger income is only commensurate with the far higher and
rarer powers which he exercises, and the far greater
importance of the function he fulfills. Shall not education
have its reward, and skill its payment? What incentive would
there be to the toil needed to learn to do anything well
were great prizes not to be gained by those who learn to
excel? It would not merely be gross injustice to refuse a
Raphael or a Rubens more than a house-painter, but it would
prevent the development of great painters. To destroy
inequalities in condition would be to destroy the incentive
to progress. To quarrel with them is to quarrel with the
laws of nature. We might as well rail against the length of
the days or the phases of the moon; complain that there are
valleys and mountains; zones of tropical heat and regions of
eternal ice. And were we by violent measures to divide
wealth equally, we should accomplish nothing but harm; in a
little while there would be inequalities as great as before.

This, in substance, is the teaching which we constantly
hear. It is accepted by some because it is flattering to
their vanity, in accordance with their interests or pleasing
to their hope; by others, because it is dinned into their
ears. Like all false theories that obtain wide acceptance,
it contains much truth. But it is truth isolated from other
truth or alloyed with falsehood.

To try to pump out a ship with a hole in her bottom would be
hopeless; but that is not to say that leaks may not be
stopped and ships pumped dry. It is undeniable that, under
present conditions, inequalities in fortune would tend to
reassert themselves even if arbitrarily leveled for a
moment; but that does not prove that the conditions from
which this tendency to inequality springs may not be
altered. Nor because there are differences in human
qualities and powers does it follow that existing
inequalities of fortune are thus accounted for. I have seen
very fast compositors and very slow compositors, but the
fastest I ever saw could not set twice as much type as the
slowest, and I doubt if in other trades the variations are
greater. Between normal men the difference of a sixth or
seventh is a great difference in height---the tallest giant
ever known was scarcely more than four times as tall as the
smallest dwarf ever known, and I doubt if any good observer
will say that the mental differences of men are greater than
the physical differences. Yet we already have men hundreds
of millions of times richer than other men.

That he who produces should have, that he who saves should
enjoy, is consistent with human reason and with the natural
order. But existing inequalities of wealth cannot be
justified on this ground. As a matter of fact, how many
great fortunes can be truthfully said to have been fairly
earned? How many of them represent wealth produced by their
possessors or those from whom their present possessors
derived them? Did there not go to the formation of all of
them something. more than superior industry and skill? Such
qualities may give the first start, but when fortunes begin
to roll up into millions there will always be found some
element of monopoly, some appropriation of wealth produced
by others. Often there is a total absence of superior
industry, skill or self-denial, and merely better luck or
greater unscrupulousness.

An acquaintance of mine died in San Francisco recently,
leaving \$4,000,000, which will go to heirs to be looked up
in England. I have known many men more industrious, more
skillful, more temperate than he---men who did not or who
will not leave a cent. This man did not get his wealth by
his industry, skill or temperance. He no more produced it
than did those lucky relations in England who may now do
nothing for the rest of their lives. He became rich by
getting hold of a piece of land in the early days, which, as
San Francisco grew, became very valuable. His wealth
represented not what he had earned, but what the monopoly of
this bit of the earth's surface enabled him to appropriate
of the'earnings of others.

A man died in Pittsburgh, the other day, leaving
\$3,000,000. He may or may not have been particularly
industrious, skillful and economical, but it was not by
virtue of these qualities that he got so rich. It was
because he went to Washington and helped lobby through a
bill which, by way of "protecting American workmen against
the pauper labor of Europe," gave him the advantage of a 60%
tariff. To the day of his death he was a stanch
protectionist, and said free trade would ruin our "infant
industries." Evidently the \$3,000,000 which he was enabled
to lay by from his own little cherub of an "infant industry"
did not represent what he had added to production. It was
the advantage given him by the tariff that enabled him to
scoop it up from other people's earnings.

This element of monopoly, of appropriation and spoliation
will, when we come to analyze them, be found to largely
account for all great fortunes.

There are two classes of men who are always talking as
though great fortunes resulted from the power of increase
belonging to capital---those who declare that present social
adjustments are all right; and those who denounce capital
and insist that interest should be abolished. The typical
rich man of the one set is he who, saving his earnings,
devotes the surplus to aiding production, and becomes rich
by the natural growth of his capital. The other set make
calculations of the enormous sum a dollar put out at 6%
compound interest will amount to in a hundred years, and say
we must abolish interest if we would prevent the growth of
great fortunes.

But I think it difficult to instance any great fortune
really due to the legitimate growth of capital obtained by
industry.

The great fortune of the Rothschilds springs from the
treasure secured by the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel by selling
his people to England to fight against our forefathers in
their struggle for independence. It began in the blood-money
received by this petty tyrant from greater tyrants as the
price of the lives of his subjects. It has grown to its
present enormous dimensions by the jobbing of loans raised
by European kings for holding in subjection the people and
waging destructive wars upon each other. It no more
represents the earnings of industry or of capital than do
the sums now being wrung by England from the
poverty-stricken fellahs of Egypt to pay for the enormous
profits on loans to the Khedive, which he wasted on palaces,
yachts, harems, ballet-dancers, and cart-loads of diamonds,
such as he gave to the Shermans.

The great fortune of the Duke of Westminster, the richest of
the rich men of England, is purely the result of
appropriation. It no more springs from the earnings of the
present Duke of Westminster or any of his ancestors than did
the great fortunes bestowed by Russian monarchs on their
favorites when they gave them thousands of the Russian
people as their serfs. An English king, long since dead,
gave to an ancestor of the present Duke of Westminster a
piece of land over which the city of London has now
extended---that is to say, he gave him the privilege, still
recognized by the stupid English people, which enables the
present duke to appropriate so much of the earnings of so
many thousands of the present generation of Englishmen.

So, too, the great fortunes of the English brewers and
distillers have been largely built up by the operation of
the excise in fostering monopoly and concentrating the
business.

Or, turning again to the United States, take the great
fortune of the Astors. It represents for the most part a
similar appropriation of the earnings of others, as does the
income of the Duke of Westminster and other English
landlords. The first Astor made an arrangement with certain
people living in his time by virtue of which his children
are now allowed to tax other people's children---to demand a
very large part of their earnings from many thousands of the
present population of New York. Its main element is not
production or saving. No human being can produce land or lay
up land. If the Astors had all remained in Germany, or if
there had never been any Astors, the land of Manhattan
Island would have been here all the same.

Take the great Vanderbilt fortune. The first Vanderbilt was
a boatman who earned money by hard work and saved it. But it
was not working and saving that enabled him to leave such an
enormous fortune. It was spoliation and monopoly. As soon as
he got money enough he used it as a club to extort from
others their earnings. He ran off opposition lines and
monopolized routes of steamboat travel. Then he went into
railroads, pursuing the same tactics. The Vanderbilt fortune
no more comes from working and saving than did the fortune
that Captain Kidd buried.

Or take the great Gould fortune. Mr. Gould might have got
his first little start by superior industry and superior
self-denial. But it is not that which has made him the
master of a hundred millions. It was by wrecking railroads,
buying judges, corrupting legislatures, getting up rings and
pools and combinations to raise or depress stock values and
transportation rates.

So, likewise, of the great fortunes which the Pacific
railroads have created. They have been made by lobbying
through profligate donations of lands, bonds and subsidies,
by the operations of Crédit Mobilier and Contract and
Finance Companies, by monopolizing and gouging. And so of
fortunes made by such combinations as the Standard Oil
Company, the Bessemer Steel Ring, the Whisky Tax Ring, the
Lucifer Match Ring, and the various rings for the
"protection of the American workman from the pauper labor of
Europe."

Or take the fortunes made out of successful patents. Like
that element in so many fortunes that comes from the
increased value of land, these result from monopoly, pure
and simple. And though I am not now discussing the
expediency of patent laws, it may be observed, in passing,
that in the vast majority of cases the men who make fortunes
out of patents are not the men who make the inventions.

Through all great fortunes, and, in fact, through nearly all
acquisitions that in these days can fairly be termed
fortunes, these elements of monopoly, of spoliation, of
gambling run. The head of one of the largest manufacturing
firms in the United States said to me recently, "It is not
on our ordinary business that we make our money; it is where
we can get a monopoly." And this, I think, is generally
true.

Consider the important part in building up fortunes which
the increase of land values has had, and is having, in the
United States. This is, of course, monopoly, pure and
simple. When land increases in value it does not mean that
its owner has added to the general wealth. The owner may
never have seen the land or done aught to improve it. He
may, and often does, live in a distant city or in another
country. Increase of land values simply means that the
owners, by virtue of their appropriation of something that
existed before man was, have the power of taking a larger
share of the wealth produced by other people's labor.
Consider how much the monopolies created and the advantages
given to the unscrupulous by the tariff and by our system of
internal taxation---how much the railroad (a business in its
nature a monopoly), telegraph, gas, water and other similar
monopolies, have done to concentrate wealth; how special
rates, pools, combinations, corners, stock-watering and
stock-gambling, the destructive use of wealth in driving off
or buying off opposition which the public must finally pay
for, and many other things which these will suggest, have
operated to build up large fortunes, and it will at least
appear that the unequal distribution of wealth is due in
great measure to sheer spoliation; that the reason why those
who work hard get so little, while so many who work little
get so much, is, in very large measure, that the earnings of
the one class are, in one way or another, filched away from
them to swell the incomes of the other.

That individuals are constantly making their way from the
ranks of those who get less than their earnings to the ranks
of those who get more than their earnings, no more proves
this state of things right than the fact that merchant
sailors were constantly becoming pirates and participating
in the profits of piracy, would prove that piracy was right
and that no effort should be made to suppress it.

I am not denouncing the rich, nor seeking, by speaking of
these things, to excite envy and hatred; but if we would get
a clear understanding of social problems, we must recognize
the fact that it is to monopolies which we permit and
create, to advantages which we give one man over another, to
methods of extortion sanctioned by law and by public
opinion, that some men are enabled to get so enormously rich
while others remain so miserably poor. If we look around us
and note the elements of monopoly, extortion and spoliation
which go to the building up of all, or nearly all, fortunes,
we see on the one hand how disingenuous are those who preach
to us that there is nothing wrong in social relations and
that the inequalities in the distribution of wealth spring
from the inequalities of human nature; and on the other
hand, we see how wild are those who talk as though capital
were a public enemy, and propose plans for arbitrarily
restricting the acquisition of wealth. Capital is a good;
the capitalist is a helper, if he is not also a monopolist.
We can safely let any one get as rich as he can if he will
not despoil others in doing so.

There are deep wrongs in the present constitution of
society, but they are not wrongs inherent in the
constitution of man nor in those social laws which are as
truly the laws of the Creator as are the laws of the
physical universe. They are wrongs resulting from bad
adjustments which it is within our power to amend. The ideal
social state is not that in which each gets an equal amount
of wealth, but in which each gets in proportion to his
contribution to the general stock. And in such a social
state there would not be less incentive to exertion than
now; there would be far more incentive. Men will be more
industrious and more moral, better workmen and better
citizens, if each takes his earnings and carries them home
to his family, than where they put their earnings in a pot
and gamble for them until some have far more than they could
have earned, and others have little or nothing.

# Is It the Best of All Possible Worlds?

There are worlds and worlds---even within bounds of the same
horizon. The man who comes into New York with plenty of
money, who puts up at the Windsor or Brunswick, and is
received by hospitable hosts in Fifth Avenue mansions, sees
one New York. The man who comes with a dollar and a half,
and goes to a twenty-five-cent lodging-house sees another.
There are also fifteen-cent lodging-houses, and people too
poor to go even to them.

Into the pleasant avenues of the Park, in the bright May
sunshine, dashes the railroad-wrecker's daughter, her tasty
riding-habit floating free from the side of her glistening
bay, and her belted groom, in fresh top-boots and smart new
livery, clattering after, at a respectful distance, on
another blooded horse, that chafes at the bit. The
stock-gambler's son, rising from his trotter at every
stride, in English fashion, his English riding-stick grasped
by the middle, raises his hat to her nod. And as he whirls
past in his London-made dogcart, a liveried servant sitting
with folded arms behind him, she exchanges salutations with
the high-born descendant of the Dutch gardener, whose
cabbage-patch, now covered with brick and mortar, has become
an "estate" of lordly income. While in the soft, warm air
rings a musical note, and drawn by mettled steeds, the
four-in-hands of the coaching-club rush by, with liveried
guards and coach-tops filled with chattering people, to whom
life, with its round of balls, parties, theaters,
flirtations and excursions, is a holiday, in which, but for
the invention of new pleasures, satiety would make time
drag.

How different this bright world from that of the old woman
who, in the dingy lower street, sits from morning to night
beside her little stock of apples and candy; from that of
the girls who stand all day behind counters and before
looms, who bend over sewing-machines for weary, weary hours,
or who come out at night to prowl the streets!

One railroad king puts the great provinces of his realm in
charge of satraps and goes to Europe; the new steel yacht of
another is being fitted, regardless of expense, for a voyage
around the world, if it pleases him to take it; a third will
not go abroad---he is too busy buying in his "little old
railroad" every day. Other human beings are gathered into
line every Sunday afternoon by the Rev.
Coffee-and-rolls-man, and listen to his preaching for the
dole they are to get. And upon the benches in the squares
set men from whose sullen, deadened faces the fire of energy
and the light of hope have gone--"tramps" and "bums," the
broken, rotted, human driftwood, the pariahs of our society.

I stroll along Broadway in the evening, and by the
magnificent saloon of the man who killed Jim Fisk, I meet a
good fellow whom I knew years ago in California, when he
could not jingle more than one dollar on another. It is
different now, and he takes a wad of bills from his pocket
to pay for the thirty-five-cent cigars we light. He has
rooms in the most costly of Broadway hotels, his clothes are
cut by Blissert, and he thinks Delmonico's about the only
place to get a decent meal. He tells me about some "big
things" he has got into, and talks about millions as though
they were marbles. If a man has any speed in him at all, he
says, it is just as easy to deal in big things as in little
things, and the men who play such large hands in the great
game are no smarter than other men when you get alongside of
them and take their measure. As to politics, he says, it is
only a question who hold the offices. The corporations rule
the country, and are going to rule it, and the man is a fool
who don't get on their side. As for the people, what do they
know or care! The press rules the people, and capital rules
the press. Better hunt with the dogs than be hunted with the
hare.

We part, and as I turn down the street another acquaintance
greets me, and, as his conversation grows interesting, I go
out of my way, for to delay him were sin, as he must be at
work by two in the morning. He has been trying to read
"Progress and Poverty," he says: but he has to take it in
such little snatches, and the children make such a noise in
his two small rooms---for his wife is afraid to let them out
on the street to learn so much bad---that it is hard work to
understand some parts of it. He is a journeyman baker, but
he has a good situation as journeyman bakers go. He works in
a restaurant, and only twelve hours a day. Most bakers, he
tells me, have to work fourteen and sixteen hours. Some of
the places they work in would sicken a man not used to it,
and even those used to it are forced to lay off every now
and again, and to drink, or they could not stand it. In some
bakeries they use good stock, he says, but they have to
charge high prices, which only the richer people will pay.
In most of them you often have to sift the maggots out of
the flour, and the butter is always rancid. He belongs to a
Union, and they are trying to get in all the journeyman
bakers; but those that work longest, and have most need of
it, are the hardest to get. Their long hours make them
stupid, and take all the spirit out of them. He has tried to
get into business for himself, and he and his wife once
pinched and saved till they got a few hundred dollars, and
then set up a little shop. But he had not money enough to
buy a share in the Flour Association---a co-operative
association of boss bakers, by which the members get stock
at lowest rates---and he could not compete, lost his money,
and had to go to work again as a journeyman. He can see no
chance at all of getting out of it, he says; he sometimes
thinks he might as well be a slave. His family grows larger
and it costs more to keep them. His rent was raised two
dollars on the 1st of May. His wife remonstrated with the
agent, said they were making no more, and it cost them more
to live. The agent said he could not help that; the property
had increased in value, and the rents must be raised. The
reason people complained of rents was that they lived too
extravagantly, and thought they must have everything anybody
else had. People could live, and keep strong and fit, on
nothing but oatmeal. If they would do that they would find
it easy enough to pay their rent.

There is such a rush across the Atlantic that it is
difficult to engage a passage for months ahead. The doors of
the fine, roomy houses in the fashionable streets will soon
be boarded up, as their owners leave for Europe, for the
seashore, or the mountains. "Everybody is out of town," they
will say. Not quite everybody, though. Some twelve or
thirteen hundred thousand people, without counting Brooklyn,
will be left to swelter through the hot summer. The swarming
tenement-houses will not be boarded up; every window and
door will be open to catch the least breath of air. The
dirty streets will be crawling with squalid life, and noisy
with the play of unkempt children, who never saw a green
Held or watched the curl of a breaker, save perhaps, when
charity gave them a treat. Dragged women will be striving to
quiet pining babies, sobbing and wailing away their little
lives for the want of wholesome nourishment and fresh air;
and degradation and misery that hides during the winter will
be seen on every hand.

In such a city as this, the world of some is as different
from the world in which others live as Jupiter may be from
Mars. There are worlds we shut our eyes to, and do not bear
to think of, still less to look at, but in which human
beings yet live---worlds in which vice takes the place of
virtue, and from which hope here and hope hereafter seem
utterly banished---brutal, discordant, torturing hells of
wickedness and suffering.

"Why do they cry for bread" asked the innocent French
princess, as the roar of the fierce, hungry mob resounded
through the courtyard of Versailles. "If they have no bread,
why don't they eat cake?"

Yet, not a fool above other fools was the pretty princess,
who never in her whole life had known that cake was not to
be had for the asking. "Why are not the poor thrifty and
virtuous and wise and temperate? one hears whenever in
luxurious parlors such subjects are mentioned. What is this
but the question of the French princess. Thrift and virtue
and wisdom and temperance are not the fruits of poverty.

But it is not this of which I intended here to speak so much
as of that complacent assumption which runs through current
thought and speech, that this work! in which we, nineteenth
century. Christian, American men and women live, is, in its
social adjustments, at least, about such a world as the
Almighty intended it to be.

Some say this in terms, others say it by implication, but in
one form or another it is constantly taught. Even the
wonders of modern invention have, with a most influential
part of society, scarcely shaken the belief that social
improvement is impossible. Men of the sort who, a little
while ago, derided the idea that steam-carriages might be
driven over the land and steam-vessels across the sea, would
not now refuse to believe in the most startling mechanical
invention. But lie who thinks society may be improved, he
who thinks that poverty and greed may be driven from the
world, is still looked upon in circles that pride themselves
on their culture and rationalism as a dreamer, if not as a
dangerous lunatic.

The old idea that everything in the social world is ordered
by the Divine Will---that it is the mysterious dispensations
of Providence that give wealth to the few and order poverty
as the lot of the many, make some rulers and the others
serfs---is losing power; but another idea that serves the
same purpose is taking its place, and we are told, in the
name of science, that the only social improvement that is
possible is by a slow race evolution, of which the fierce
struggle for existence is the impelling force; that, as I
have recently read in "a journal ot civilization" from the
pen of a man who has turned from the preaching of what he
called Christianity to the teaching of what he calls
political economy, that "only the *élite* of the race has
been raised to the point where reason and conscience can
even curb the lower motive forces," and"that for all but a
few of us the limit of attainment in life, in the best case,
is to live out our term, to pay our debts, to place three or
four children in a position as good as the father's was, and
there make the account balance." As for "friends of
humanity," and those who would "help the poor," they get
from him the same scorn which the Scribes and Pharisees
eighteen hundred years ago visited on a pestilent social
reformer whom they finally crucified.

Lying beneath all such theories is the selfishness that
would resist any inquiry into the titles to the wealth which
greed has gathered, and the difficulty and indisposition on
the part of the comfortable classes of realizing the
existence of any other world than that seen through their
own eyes.

"That one-half of the world does not know how the other half
live," is much more true of the upper than of the lower
half. We h)ok upon that which is pleasant rather than that
which is disagreeable. The shop-girl delights in the loves
of the Lord de Maltravers and the Lady Blanche, just as
children without a penny will gaze in confectioners'
windows, as hungry men dream of feasts, and poor men relish
tales of sudden wealth. And social suffering is for the most
part mute. The well-dressed take the main street, but the
ragged slink into the by-ways. The man in a good coat will
be listened to where the same man in tatters would be
hustled off. It is that part of society that has the best
reason to be satisfied with things as they are that is heard
in the press, in the church, and in the school, and that
forms the conventional opinion that this world in which we
American Christians, in the latter half ot the nineteenth
century, live is about as good a world as the Creator (if
there is a Creator) intended it should be.

But look around. All over the world the beauty and the glory
and the grace of civilization rests on human lives crushed
into misery and distortion.

I will not speak of Germany, of France, of England. Look
even here, where European civilization flowers in the free
field of a new continent; where there are no kings, no great
standing armies, no relics of feudal servitude; where
national existence began with the solemn declaration of the
equal and inalienable rights of men. I clip, almost at
random, from a daily paper, for I am not seeking the
blackest shadows:

> "Margaret Hickey, aged 30 years, came to this city a few
> days ago from Boston with a seven-week-old baby. She tried
> to get work, but was not successful. Saturday night she
> placed the child in a cellar at No. 226 West Forty-second
> street. At midnight she called at Police Headquarters and
> said she had lost her baby in Forty-third street. In the
> meantime an officer found the child. The mother was held
> until yesterday morning, when she was taken to the
> Yorkville Court and sent to the Island for six months."

Morning and evening, day after day, in these times of peace
and prosperity, one may read in our daily papers such items
as this, and worse than this. We are so used to them that
they excite no attention and no comment. We know what the
fate of Margaret Hickey, aged thirty years, and of her baby,
aged seven weeks, sent to the Island for six months, will
be. Better for them and better for society were they drowned
outright, as we would drown a useless cat and mangy kitten;
but so common are such items that we glance at them as we
glance at the number of birds wounded at a pigeon-match, and
turn to read "what is going on in society;" of the last new
opera or play; of the cottages taken for the season at
Newport or Long Branch; of the millionaire's divorce or the
latest great defalcation; how Heber Newton is to be fired
out of the Episcopal church for declaring the Song of
Solomon a love-drama, and the story of Jonah and the whale a
poetical embellishment; or how the great issue which the
American people are to convulse themselves about next year
is the turning of the Republican party out of power.

I read the other day in a Brooklyn paper of a coroner's jury
summoned to inquire, as the law directs, into the cause of
death of a two days' infant. The unwholesome room was
destitute of everything save a broken chair, a miserable bed
and an empty whisky-bottle. On the bed lay, uncared for, a
young girl, mother of the dead infant; over the chair, in
drunken stupor, sprawled a man---her father. "The
horror-stricken jury," said the report, "rendered a verdict
in accordance with the facts, and left the place as fast as
they could." So do we turn from these horrors. Are there not
policemen and station-houses, almshouses and charitable
societies?

Nevertheless, we send missionaries to the heathen; and I
read the other day how the missionaries, sent to preach to
the Hindoos the Baptist version of Christ's Gospel, had been
financed out of the difference between American currency and
Indian rupees by the godly men who stay at home and boss the
job. Yet, from Arctic to Antarctic Circle, where are the
heathen among whom such degraded and distorted human beings
are to be found as in our centers of so-called Christian
civilization, where we have such a respect for the
all-seeing eye of God that if you want a drink on Sunday you
must go into the saloon by the back door? Among what tribe
of savages, who never saw a missionary, can the cold-blooded
horrors testified to in the Tewksbury Almshouse
investigation be matched? "Babies don't generally live long
here," they told the farmer's wife who brought them a little
waif And neither did they---seventy-three out of
seventy-four dying in a few weeks, their little bodies sold
off at a round rate per dozen to the dissecting table, and a
six-months' infant left there two days losing three pounds
in weight. Nor did adults---the broken men and women who
there sought shelter---fare better. They were robbed,
starved, beaten, turned into marketable corpses as fast as
possible, while the highly respectable managers waxed fat
and rich, and set before legislative committees the best of
dinners and the choicest of wines. It were slander to dumb
brutes to speak of the bestial cruelty disclosed by the
opening of this whited sepulchre. Yet, not only do the
representatives of the wealth and culture and "high moral
ideas" of Massachusetts receive coldly these revelations,
they fight bitterly the man who has made them, as though the
dragging of such horrors to light, not the doing of them,
were the unpardonable sin. They were only paupers! And I
read in the journal founded by Horace Greeley, that "the
woes of the Tewksbury paupers are no worse than the common
lot of all inmates of pauper refuges the country over."

Or take the revelations made this winter before a
legislative committee of the barbarities practiced in New
York state prisons. The system remains unaltered; not an
official has been even dismissed. The belief that dominates
our society is evidently that which I find expressed in "a
journal of civilization" by a reverend professor at Yale,
that "the criminal has no claims against society at all.
What shall be done with him is a question of expediency!" I
wonder if our missionaries to the heathen ever read the
American papers? I am certain they don't read them to the
heathen.

Behind all this is social disease. Criminals, paupers,
prostitutes, women who abandon their children, men who kill
themselves in despair of making a living, the existence of
great armies of beggars and thieves, prove that there are
large classes who find it difficult with the hardest toil to
make an honest and sufficient livelihood. So it is. "There
is," incidentally said to m.e, recently, a New York Supreme
Judge, "a large class---I was about to say a majority---of
the population of New York and Brooklyn, who just live, and
to whom the rearing of two more children means inevitably a
boy for the penitentiary and a girl for the brothel." A
partial report of charitable work in New York city, not
embracing the operations of a number of important societies,
shows 36,000 families obtaining relief, while it is
estimated that were the houses in New York city containing
criminals and the recipients of charity set side by side
they would make a street twenty-two miles long. One
charitable society in New York city extended aid this winter
to the families of three hundred tailors. Their wages are so
small when they do work that when work gives out they must
beg, steal or starve.

Nor is this state of things confined to the metropolis. In
Massachusetts the statistician of the Labor Bureau declares
that among wage laborers the earnings (exclusive of the
earnings of minors) are less than the cost of living; that
in the majority of cases workingmen do not support their
families on their individual earnings alone, and that
fathers are forced to depend upon their children for from
one-quarter to one-third of the family earnings, children
under fifteen supplying from one-eighth to one-sixth of the
total earnings. Miss Emma E. Brown has shown how parents are
forced to evade the law prohibiting the employment of young
children, and in Pennsylvania, where a similar law has been
passed, I read how, forced by the same necessity, the
operatives of a mill, have resolved to boycott a storekeeper
whose relative had informed that children under thirteen
were employed. While in Canada last winter it was shown that
children under thirteen were kept at work in the mills from
six in the evening to six in the morning, a man on duty with
a strap to keep them awake.

Illinois is one of the richest States of the Union. It is
scarcely yet fairly settled, for the last census show the
male population in excess of the female, and wages are
considerably higher than in more eastern States. In their
last report the Illinois Commissioners of Labor Statistics
say that their tables of wages and cost of living are
representative only of intelligent workingmen who make the
most of their advantages, and do not reach the confines of
that world of helpless ignorance and destitution in which
multitudes in all large cities continually live, and whose
only statistics are those of epidemics, pauperism and
crime." Nevertheless, they go on to say, an examination of
these tables will demonstrate that one-half of these
intelligent workingmen of Illinois "are not even able to
earn enough for their daily bread, and have to depend upon
the labor of women and children to eke out their miserable
existence."

It is the fool who saith in his heart there is no God. But
what shall we call the man who tells us that with this sort
of a world God bids us be content?

# That We All Might Be Rich

The terms rich and poor are of course frequently used in a
relative sense. Among Irish peasants, kept on the verge of
starvation by the tribute wrung from them to maintain the
luxury of absentee landlords in London or Paris, "the woman
of three cows" will be looked on as rich, while in the
society of millionaires a man with only \$500,000 will be
regarded as poor. Now, we cannot, of course, all be rich in
the sense of having more than others; but when people say,
as they so often do, that we cannot all be rich, or when
they say that we must always have the poor with us, they do
not use the words in this comparative sense. They mean by
the rich those who have enough, or more than enough, wealth
to gratify all reasonable wants, and by the poor those who
have not.

Now, using the words in this sense, I join issue with those
who say that we cannot all be rich; with those who declare
that in human society the poor must always exist. I do not,
of course, mean that we all might have an array of servants;
that we all might outshine each other in dress, in equipage,
in the lavishness of our balls or dinners, in the
magnificence of our houses. That would be a contradiction in
terms. What I mean is, that we all might have leisure,
comfort and abundance, not merely of the necessaries, but
even of what are now esteemed the elegancies and luxuries of
life. I do not mean to say that absolute equality could be
had, or would be desirable. I do not mean to say that we
could all have, or would want, the same quantity of all the
different forms of wealth. But I do mean to say that we
might all have enough wealth to satisfy reasonable desires;
that we might all have so much of the material things we now
struggle for, that no one would want to rob or swindle his
neighbor; that no one would worry all day, or lie awake at
nights, fearing he might be brought to poverty, or thinking
how he might acquire wealth.

Does this seem a utopian dream? What would people of fifty
years ago have thought of one who would have told them that
it was possible to sew by steam-power; to cross the Atlantic
in six days, or the continent in three; to have a message
sent from London at noon delivered in Boston three hours
before noon; to hear in New York the voice of a man talking
in Chicago?

Did you ever see a pail of swill given to a pen of hungry
hogs? That is human society as it is.

Did you ever see a company of well-bred men and women
sitting down to a good dinner, without scrambling, or
jostling, or gluttony, each, knowing that his own appetite
will be satisfied, deferring to and helping the others? That
is human society as it might be.

"Devil catch the hindmost" is the motto of our so-called
civilized society to-day. We learn early to "take care of
No. 1," lest No. 1 should suffer; we learn early to grasp
from others that we may not want ourselves. The fear of
poverty makes us admire great wealth; and so habits of greed
are formed, and we behold the pitiable spectacle of men who
have already more than they can by any possibility use,
toiling, striving, grasping to add to their store up to the
very verge of the grave---that grave which, whatever else it
may mean, does certainly mean the parting with all earthly
possessions however great they be.

In vain, in gorgeous churches, on the appointed Sunday, is
the parable of Dives and Lazarus read. What can it mean in
churches where Dives would be welcomed and Lazarus shown the
door? In vain may the preacher preach of the vanity of
riches, while poverty engulfs the hindermost. But the mad
struggle would cease when the fear of poverty had vanished.
Then, and not till then, will a truly Christian civilization
become possible.

And may not this be?

We are so accustomed to poverty that even in the most
advanced countries we regard it as the natural lot of the
great masses of the people; that we take it as a matter of
course that even in our highest civilization large classes
should want the necessaries of healthful life, and the vast
majority should only get a poor and pinched living by the
hardest toil. There are professors of political economy who
teach that this condition of things is the result of social
laws of which it is idle to complain! There are ministers of
religion who preach that this is the condition which an
all-wise, all-powerful Creator intended for his children! If
an architect were to build a theatre so that not more than
one-tenth of the audience could see and hear, we would call
him a bungler and a botch. If a man were to give a feast and
provide so little food that nine-tenths of his guests must
go away hungry, we would call him a fool, or worse. Yet so
accustomed are we to poverty, that even the preachers of
what passes for Christianity tell us that the great
Architect of the Universe, to whose infinite skill all
nature testifies, has made such a botch job of this world
that the vast majority of the human creatures whom he has
called into it are condemned by the conditions he has
'imposed to want, suffering, and brutalizing toil that gives
no opportunity for the development of mental powers---must
pass their lives in a hard straggle to merely live!

Yet who can look about him without seeing that to whatever
cause poverty may be due, it is not due to the niggardliness
of nature; without seeing that it is blindness or blasphemy
to assume that the Creator has condemned the masses of men
to hard toil for a bare living?

If some men have not enough to live decently, do not others
have far more than they really need? If there is not wealth
sufficient to go around, giving every one abundance, is it
because we have reached the limit of the production of
wealth? Is our land all in use? is our labor all employed?
is our capital all utilized? On the contrary, in whatever
direction we look we see the most stupendous waste of
productive forces---of productive forces so potent that were
they permitted to freely play the production of wealth would
be so enormous that there would be more than a sufficiency
for all. What branch of production is there in which the
limit of production has been reached? What single article of
wealth is there of which we might not produce enormously
more?

If the mass of the population of New York are jammed into
the fever-breeding rooms of tenement-houses, it is not
because there are not vacant lots enough in and around New
York to give each family space for a separate home. If
settlers are going into Montana and Dakota and Manitoba, it
is not because there are not vast areas of untilled land
much nearer the centres of population. If farmers are paying
one-fourth, one-third, or even one-half their crops for the
privilege of getting land to cultivate, it is not because
there is not, even in our oldest states, great quantities of
land which no one is cultivating.

So true is it that poverty does not come from the inability
to produce more wealth that from every side we hear that the
power to produce is in excess of the ability to find a
market; that the constant fear seems to be not that too
little, but that too much, will be produced! Do we not
maintain a high tariff, and keep at every port a horde of
Custom House officers, for fear the people of other
countries will overwhelm us with their goods? Is not a great
part of our machinery constantly idle? Are there not, even
in what we call good times, an immense number of unemployed
men who would gladly be at work producing wealth if they
could only get the opportunity? Do we not, even now, hear,
from every side, of embarrassment from the very excess of
productive power, and of combinations to reduce production?
Coal operators band together to limit their output;
ironworks have shut down, or are running on half time;
distillers have agreed to limit their production to one-half
their capacity, and sugar refiners to 60%; paper-mills are
suspending for one, two or three days a week; the gunny
cloth manufacturers, at a recent meeting, agreed to close
their mills until the present overstock on the market is
greatly reduced; many other manufacturers have done the same
thing. The shoemaking machinery of E'ew England can, in six
months full running, it is said, supply the whole demand of
the United States for twelve months; the machinery for
making rubber goods can turn out twice as much as the market
will take.

This seeming glut of production, this seeming excess of
productive power, runs through all branches of industry, and
is evident all over the civilized world. From blackberries,
bananas or apples, to ocean steamships or plate-glass
mirrors, the're is scarcely an article of human comfort or
convenience that could not be produced in very much greater
quantities than now without lessening the production of
anything else.

So evident is this that many people think and talk and write
as though the trouble is that there is not *work* enough to
go around. We are in constant fear that other nations may do
for us some of the work we might do for ourselves, and, to
prevent them, guard ourselves with a tariff. We laud as
public benefactors those who, as we say, "furnish
employment." We are constantly talking as though this
"furnishing of employment," this "giving of work" were the
greatest boon that could be conferred upon society. To
listen to much that is talked and much that is written, one
would think that the cause of poverty is that there is not
work enough for so many people, and that if the Creator had
made the rock harder, the soil less fertile, iron as scarce
aa gold, and gold as diamonds; or if ships would sink and
cities burn down oftener, there would be less poverty,
because there would be more work to do.

The Lord Mayor of London tells a deputation of unemployed
workingmen that there is no demand for their labor, and that
the only resource for them is to go to the poorhouse or
emigrate. The English Government is shipping from Ireland
able-bodied men and women to avoid maintaining them as
paupers. Even in our own land there are at all times large
numbers, and in hard times vast numbers, earnestly seeking
work---the opportunity to give labor for the things produced
by labor.

Perhaps nothing shows more clearly the enormous forces of
production constantly going to waste than the fact that the
most prosperous times in all branches of business that this
country has known was during the civil war, when we were
maintaining great fleets and armies, and millions of our
industrial population were engaged in supplying them with
wealth for unproductive consumption or for reckless
destruction. It is idle to talk about the fictitious
prosperity of these flush times. The masses of the people
lived better, dressed better, found it easier to get a
living, and had more of luxuries and amusements than in
normal times. There was more real, tangible wealth in the
North at the close than at the beginning of the war. Nor was
it the great issue of paper money, nor the creation of the
debt which caused this prosperity. The Government presses
struck off promises to pay; they could not print ships,
cannon, arms, tools, food and clothing. Nor did we borrow
these things from other countries or "from posterity." Our
bonds did not begin to go to Europe until the close of the
war, and the people of one generation can no more borrow
from the people of a subsequent generation than we who live
on this planet can borrow from the inhabitants of another
planet or another solar system. The wealth consumed and
destroyed by our fleets and armies came from the then
existing stock of wealth. We could have carried on the war
without the issue of a single bond, if, when we did not
shrink from taking from wife and children their only
bread-winner, we had not shrunk from taking the wealth of
the rich.

Our armies and fleets were maintained, the enormous
unproductive and destructive use of wealth was kept up, by
the labor and capital then and there engaged in production.
And it was that the demand caused by the war stimulated
productive forces into activity that the enormous drain of
the war was not only supplied, but that the North grew
richer. The waste of labor in marching and counter-marching,
in digging trenches, throwing up earthworks, and fighting
battles, the waste of wealth consumed or destroyed by our
armies and fleets did not amount to as much as the waste
constantly going on from unemployed labor and idle or
partially used machinery.

It is evident that this enormous waste of productive power
is due, not to defects in the laws of nature, but to social
maladjustments which deny to labor access to the natural
opportunities of labor and rob the laborer of his just
reward. Evidently the glut of markets does not really come
from over-production when there are so many who want the
things which are said to be over-produced, and would gladly
exchange their labor for them did they have opportunity.
Every day passed in enforced idleness by a laborer who would
gladly be at work could he find opportunity, means so much
less in the fund which creates the effective demand for
other labor; every time wages are screwed down means so much
reduction in the purchasing power of the workmen whose
incomes are thus reduced. The paralysis which at all time
wastes productive power, and which in times of industrial
depression causes more loss than a great war, springs from
the difficulty which those who would gladly satisfy their
wants by their labor find in doing so. It cannot come from
any natural limitation, so long as human desires remain
unsatisfied, and nature yet offers to man the raw material
of wealth. It must come from social maladjustments which
permit the monopolization of these natural opportunities,
and which rob labor of its fair reward.

What these maladjustments are I shall in subsequent chapters
endeavor to show. In this I wish simply to call attention to
the fact that productive power in such a state of
civilization as ours is sufficient, did we give it play, to
so enormously increase the production of wealth as to give
abundance to all---to point out that the cause of poverty is
not in natural limitations, which we cannot alter, but in
inequalities and injustices of distribution entirely within
our control.

The passenger who leaves New York on a trans-Atlantic
steamer does not fear that the provisions will give out. The
men who run these steamers do not send them to sea without
provisions enough for all they carry. Did he who made this
whirling planet for our sojourn lack the forethought of man?
Not so. In soil and sunshine, in vegetable and animal life,
in veins of minerals, and in pulsing forces which we are
only beginning to use, are capabilities which we cannot
exhaust---materials and powers from which human effort,
guided by intelligence, may gratify every material want of
every human creature. There is in nature no reason for
poverty---not even for the poverty of the crippled or the
decrepit. For man is by nature a social animal, and the
family affections and the social sympathies would, where
chronic poverty did not distort and embrute, amply provide
for those who could not provide for themselves.

But if we will not use the intelligence with which we have
been gifted to adapt social organization to natural
laws---if we allow dogs-in-the-manger to monopolize what
they cannot use; if we allow strength and cunning to rob
honest labor, we must have chronic poverty, and all the
social evils it inevitably brings. Under such conditions
there would be poverty in paradise!

"The poor ye have always with you." If ever a scripture has
been wrested to the devil's service, this is that scripture.
How often have these words been distorted from their obvious
meaning to soothe conscience into acquiescence in human
misery and degradation---to bolster that blasphemy, the very
negation and denial of Christ's teachings, that the All Wise
and Most Merciful, the Infinite Father, has decreed that so
many of his creatures must be poor in order that others of
his creatures to whom he wills the good things of life
should enjoy the pleasure and virtue of doling out alms!
"The poor ye have always with you," said Christ; but all his
teachings supply the limitation, "until the coming of the
Kingdom." In that kingdom of God *on earth*, that kingdom of
justice and love for which he taught his followers to strive
and pray, there will be no poor. But though the faith and
the hope and the striving for this kingdom are of the very
essence of Christ's teaching, the staunchest disbelievers
and revilers of its possibility are found among those who
call themselves Christians. Queer ideas of the Divinity have
some of these Christians who hold themselves orthodox and
contribute to the conversion of the heathen. A very rich
orthodox Christian said to a newspaper reporter, awhile ago,
on the completion of a large work out of which he is said to
have made millions: "We have been peculiarly favored by
Divine Providence; iron never was so cheap before, and labor
has been a drug in the market."

That in spite of all our great advances we have yet with us
the poor, those who, without fault of their own, cannot get
healthful and wholesome conditions of life, is *our* fault
and *our* shame. Who that looks about him can fail to see
that it is only the injustice that denies natural
opportunities to labor, and robs the producer of the fruits
of his toil, that prevents us all from being rich. Consider
the enormous powers of production now going to waste;
consider the great number of unproductive consumers
maintained at the expense of producers---the rich men and
dudes, the worse than useless Government officials, the
pickpockets, burglars and confidence men; the highly
respectable thieves who carry on their operations inside the
law; the great army of lawyers; the beggars and paupers, and
inmates of prisons; the monopolists and cornerers and
gamblers of every kind and grade. Consider how much brains
and energy and capital are devoted, not to the production of
wealth, but to the grabbing of wealth. Consider the waste
caused by competition which does not increase wealth; by
laws which restrict production and exchange. Consider how
human power is lessened by insufficient food, by unwholesome
lodgings, by work done under conditions that produce disease
and shorten life. Consider how intemperance and unthrift
follow poverty. Consider how the ignorance bred of poverty
lessens production, and how the vice bred of poverty causes
destruction, and who can doubt that under conditions of
social justice all might be rich?

The wealth-producing powers that would be evoked in a social
state based on justice, where wealth went to the producers
of wealth, and the banishment of poverty had banished the
fear and greed and lusts that spring from it, we now can
only faintly imagine. Wonderful as have been the discoveries
and inventions of this century, it is evident that we have
only begun to grasp that dominion which it is given to mind
to obtain over matter. Discovery and invention are born of
leisure, of material comfort, of freedom. These secured to
all, and who shall say to what command over nature man may
not attain?

It is not necessary that any one should be condemned to
monotonous toil; it is not necessary that any one should
lack the wealth and the leisure which permit the development
of the faculties that raise man above the animal. Mind, not
muscle, is the motor of progress, the force which compels
nature and produces wealth. In turning men into machines we
are wasting the highest powers. Already in our society there
is a favored class who need take no thought for the
morrow---what they shall eat, or what they shall drink, or
wherewithal they shall be clothed. And may it not be that
Christ was more than a dreamer when he told his disciples
that in that kingdom of justice for which he taught them to
work and pray this might be the condition of all?

# First Principles

Whoever considers the political and social problems that
confront us, must see that they centre in the problem of the
distribution of wealth, and he must also see that, though
their solution may be simple, it must be radical.

For every social wrong there must be a remedy. But the
remedy can be nothing less than the abolition of the wrong.
Half-way measures, mere ameliorations and secondary reforms,
can at any time accomplish little, and can in the long run
avail nothing. Our charities, our penal laws, our
restrictions and prohibitions, by which, with so little
avail, we endeavor to assuage poverty and check crime, what
are they, at the very best, but th6 device of the clown who,
having put the whole burden of his ass into one pannier,
sought to enable the poor animal to walk straight by loading
up the other pannier with stones.

In New York, as I write, the newspapers and the churches are
calling for subscriptions to their "fresh air funds," that
little children may be taken for a day or for a week from
the deadly heat of stifling tenement rooms and given a
breath of the fresh breeze of sea shore or mountain; but
what little does it avail, when we take such children only
to return them to their previous conditions---conditions
which to many mean even worse than death of the body;
conditions which make it certain that of the lives that may
thus be saved, some are saved for the brothel and the
almshouse, and some for the penitentiary. We may go on
forever merely raising fresh air funds, and how great soever
be the funds we raise, the need will only grow, and
children---just such children as those of whom Christ said,
"Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for
I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold
the face of my Father"--will die like flies, so long as
poverty compels fathers and mothers to the life of the
squalid tenement-room. We may open "midnight missions" and
support "Christian homes for destitute young girls," but
what will they avail in the face of general conditions which
render so many men unable to support a wife; which make
young girls think it a privilege to be permitted to earn
three dollars by eighty-one hours' work, and which can drive
a mother to such despair that she will throw her babies from
a wharf of our Christian city and then leap into the river
herself! How vainly shall we endeavor to repress crime by
our barbarous punishment of the poorer class of criminals so
long as children are reared in the brutalizing influences of
poverty, so long as the bite of want drives men to crime?
How little better than idle is it for us to prohibit infant
labor in factories when the scale of wages is so low that it
will not enable fathers to support their families without
the earnings of their little children? How shall we try to
prevent political corruption by framing new checks and
setting one official to watch another official, when the
fear of want stimulates the lust for wealth, and the rich
thief is honored while honest poverty is despised?

Nor yet could we accomplish any permanent equalization in
the distribution of wealth were we to forcibly take from
those who have and give to those who have not. We would do
great injustice; we would work great harm; but, from the
very moment of such a forced equalization, the tendencies
which show themselves in the present unjust inequalities
would begin to assert themselves again, and we would in a
little while have as gross inequalities as before.

AVhat we must do if we would cure social disease and avert
social danger is to remove the causes which prevent the just
distribution of wealth.

This work is only one of removal. It is not necessary for us
to frame elaborate and skillful plans for securing the just
distribution of wealth. For the just distribution of wealth
is manifestly the natural distribution of wealth, and
injustice in the distribution of wealth must, therefore,
result from artificial obstructions to this natural
distribution.

As to what is the just distribution of wealth there can be
no dispute. It is that which gives wealth to him who makes
it, and secures wealth to him who saves it. So clearly is
this the only just distribution of wealth that even those
shallow writers who attempt to defend the existing order of
things are driven, by a logical necessity, to falsely assume
that those who now possess the larger share of wealth made
it and saved it, or got it by gift or by inheritance, from
those who did make it and save it; whereas the fact is, as I
have in a previous paper shown, that all these great
fortunes, whose corollaries are paupers and tramps, really
come from the sheer appropriation of the makings and savings
of other people.

And that this just distribution of wealth is the natural
distribution of wealth can be plainly seen. Nature gives
wealth to labor, and to nothing but labor. There is, and
there can be, no article of wealth but such as labor has got
by making it, or searching for it, out of the raw material
which the Creator has given us to draw from. If there were
but one man in the world it is manifest that he could have
no more wealth than he was able to make and to save. This is
the natural order. And, no matter how great be the
population, or how elaborate the society, no one can have
more wealth than he produces and saves, unless he gets it as
a free gift from some one else, or by appropriating the
earnings of some one else.

An English writer has divided all men into three
classes---workers, beggars and thieves. The classification
is not complimentary to the "upper classes" and the "better
classes," as they are accustomed to esteem themselves, yet
it is economically true. There are only three ways by which
any individual can get wealth---by work, by gift or by
theft. And, clearly, the reason why the workers get so
little is that the beggars and thieves get so much. "When a
man gets wealth that he does not produce, he necessarily
gets it at the expense of those who produce it.

All we need do to secure a just distribution of wealth, is
to do that which all theories agree to be the primary
function of government---to secure to each the free use of
his own powers, limited only by the equal freedom of all
others; to secure to each the full enjoyment of his own
earnings, limited only by such contributions as he may be
fairly called upon to make for purposes of common benefit.
When we have done this we shall have done all that we can do
to make social institutions conform to the sense of justice
and to the natural order.

I wish to emphasize this point, for there are those who
constantly talk and write as though whoever finds fault with
the present distribution of wealth were demanding that the
rich should be spoiled for the benefit of the poor; that the
idle should be taken care of at the expense of the
industrious, and that a false and impossible equality should
be created, which, by reducing every one to the same dead
level, would destroy all incentive to excel and bring
progress to a halt.

In the reaction from the glaring injustice of present social
conditions, such wild schemes have been proposed, and still
find advocates. But to my way of thinking they are as
impracticable and repugnant as they can seem to those who
are loudest in their denunciations of "communism." I am not
willing to say that in the progress of humanity a state of
society may not be possible which shall realize the formula
of Louis Blanc, "From each according to his abilities; to
each according to his wants," for there exist to-day in the
religious Orders of the Catholic Church, associations which
maintain the communism of early Christianity. But it seems
to me that the only power by which such a state of society
can be attained and preserved is that which the framers of
the schemes I speak of generally ignore, even when they do
not directly antagonize---a deep, definite, intense,
religious faith, so clear, so burning as to latterly melt
away the thought of self---a general moral condition such as
that which the Methodists declare, under the name of
"sanctification," to be individually possible, in which the
dream of pristine innocence should become reality, and man,
so to speak, should again walk with God.

But the possibility of such a state of society seems to me
in the present stage of human development a speculation
which comes within the higher domain of religious faith
rather than that with which the economist or practical
statesman can concern himself. That nature, as it is
apparent to us here, in this infinitesimal point in space
and time that we call the world, is the highest expression
of the power and purpose that called the universe into
being, what thoughtful man dare affirm? Yet it is manifest
that the only way by which man may attain higher things is
by conforming his conduct to those commandments which are as
obvious in his relations with his fellows and with external
nature as though they were graved by the finger of
Omnipotence upon tablets of imperishable stone. In the order
of moral development, Moses comes before Christ--"Thou shalt
not kill"; "Thou shalt not commit adultery"; "Thou shalt not
steal"; before "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself" The
command "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the
corn," precedes the entrancing vision of universal peace, in
which even Nature's rapine shall cease, when the lion shall
lay down with the lamb and a little child shall lead them.

That justice is the highest quality in the moral hierarchy I
do not say; but that it is the first. That which is above
justice must be based on justice, and include justice, and
be reached through justice. It is not by accident that, in
the Hebraic religious development which through Christianity
we have inherited, the declaration, "The Lord thy God is a
just God," precedes the sweeter revelation of a God of Love.
Until the eternal justice is perceived, the eternal love
must be hidden. As the individual must be just before he can
be truly generous, so must human society be based upon
justice before it can be based on benevolence.

This, and this alone, is what I contend for---that our
social institutions be conformed to justice; to those
natural and eternal principles of right that are so obvious
that no one can deny or dispute them---so obvious that by a
law of the human mind even those who try to defend social
injustice must invoke them. This, and this alone, I contend
for---that he who makes should have; that he who saves
should enjoy. I ask in behalf of the poor nothing whatever
that properly belongs to the rich. Instead of weakening and
confusing the idea of property, I would surround it with
stronger sanctions. Instead of lessening the incentive to
the production of wealth, I would make it more powerful by
making the reward more certain. Whatever any man has added
to the common stock of wealth, or has received of the free
will of him who did produce it, let that be his as against
all the world---his to use or to give, to do with it
whatever he may please, so long as such use does not
interfere with the equal freedom of others. For my part, I
would put no limit on acquisition. No matter how many
millions any man can get by methods which do not involve the
robbery of others---they are his: let him have them. I would
not even ask him for charity, or have it dinned into his
ears that it is his duty to help the poor. That is his own
affair. Let him do as he pleases with his own, without
restriction and without suggestion. If he gets without
taking from others, and uses without hurting others, what he
does with his wealth is his own business and his own
responsibility.

I reverence the spirit that, in such cities as London and
New York, organizes such great charities and gives to them
such magnificent endowments, but that there is need for such
charities proves to me that it is a slander upon Christ to
call such cities Christian cities. I honor the Astors for
having provided for New York the Astor Library, and Peter
Cooper for having given it the Cooper Institute; but it is a
shame and a disgrace to the people of New York that such
things should be left to private beneficence. And he who
struggles for that recognition of justice which, by securing
to each his own, will make it needless to beg for alms from
one for another, is doing a greater and a higher work than
he who builds churches, or endows hospitals, or founds
colleges and libraries. This justice, which would first
secure to each his own earnings, is, it seems to me, of that
higher than almsgiving, which the Apostle had in mind, when
he said, "*Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor,
and though I give my body to he burned, and have not
charity, it profiteth me nothing*."

Let US first ask what are the natural rights of men, and
endeavor to secure them, before we propose either to beg or
to pillage.

In what succeeds I shall consider what are the natural
rights of men, and how, wider present social adjustments,
they are ignored and denied. This is made necessary by the
nature of this inquiry. But I do not wish to call upon those
my voice may reach to demand their own rights, so much as to
call upon them to secure the rights of others more helpless.
I believe that the idea of duty is more potent for social
improvement than the idea of interest; that in sympathy is a
stronger social force than in selfishness. I believe that
any great social improvement must spring from, and be
animated by, that spirit which seeks to make life better,
nobler, happier for others, rather than by that spirit which
only seeks more enjoyment for itself For the Mammon of
Injustice can always buy the selfish whenever it may think
it worth while to pay enough; but unselfishness it cannot
buy.

In the idea of the incarnation---of the God voluntarily
descending to the help of men, which is embodied not merely
in Christianity, but in other great religions---lies, I
sometimes think, a deeper truth than perhaps even the
churches teach. This is certain, that the deliverers, the
liberators, the advancers of humanity, have always been
those who were moved by the sight of injustice and misery
rather than those spurred by their own suffering. As it was
a Moses, learned in all the lore of the Egyptians, and free
to the Court of Pharaoh, and not a tasked slave, forced to
make bricks without straw, who led the Children of Israel
from the House of Bondage: as it was the Gracchi, of
patrician blood and fortune, who struggled to the death
against the land-grabbing system which finally destroyed
Rome, as it must, should it go on, in time destroy this
republic. So has it always been that the oppressed, the
degraded, the downtrodden have been freed and elevated
rather by the efforts and the sacrifices of those to whom
fortune had been more kind than by their own strength. For
the more fully men have been deprived of their natural
rights, the less their power to regain them. The more men
need help, the less can they help themselves.

The sentiment to which I would appeal is not envy, nor yet
self-interest, but that nobler sentiment which found strong,
though rude, expression in that battle-hymn which rang
through the land when a great wrong was going down in blood:

> "In the beauty of the lilies, Christ was born across the
> sea,
>
> With a glory in His bosom to transfigure you and me,
>
> *As He died to make men holy, let us die to make men
> free!*"

And what is there for which life gives us opportunity that
can be compared with the effort to do what we may, be it
ever so little, to improve social conditions and enable
other lives to reach fuller, nobler development. Old John
Brown, dying the death of the felon, launched into eternity
with pinioned arms and the kiss of the slave child on his
lips---was not his a greater life and a grander death than
though his years had been given to self-seeking? Did he not
take with him more than the man who grabs for wealth and
*leaves* his millions? Envy the rich! Who that realizes that
he must some day wake up in the beyond can envy those who
spend their strength to gather what they cannot use here and
cannot take away? The only thing certain to any of us is
death. "Like the swallow darting through thy hall, such, O
King, is the life of man!" We come from where we know not;
we go---who shall say? Impenetrable darkness behind, and
gathering shades before. What, when our time comes, does it
matter whether we have fared daintily or not, whether we
have worn soft raiment or not, whether we leave a great
fortune or nothing at all, whether we shall have reaped
honors or been despised, have been counted learned or
ignorant---as compared with how we may have used that talent
which has been intrusted to us for the Master's service?
What shall it matter, when eyeballs glaze and ears grow
dull, if out of the darkness may stretch a hand, and into
the silence may come a voice:

"*Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord!*"

I shall speak of rights, I shall speak of utility, I shall
speak of interest; I shall meet on their chosen ground those
who say that the largest production of wealth is the
greatest good, and material progress the highest aim.
Nevertheless, I appreciate the truth embodied in these words
of Mazzini to the working-classes of Italy, and would echo
them:

> "Workingmen, brothers! When Christ came and changed the
> face of the world, he spoke not of rights to the rich, who
> needed not to achieve them; nor to the poor, who would
> doubtless have abused them, in imitation of the rich; he
> spoke not of utility, nor of interest, to a people whom
> interest and utility had corrupted; he spoke of duty, he
> spoke of love, of sacrifice and of faith; and he said that
> they should be first among all who had contributed most by
> their labor to the good of all,
>
> "And the word of Christ breathed in the ear of a society
> in which all true life was extinct; recalled it to
> existence, conquered the millions, conquered the world,
> and caused the education of the human race to ascend one
> degree on the scale of progress.
>
> "Workingmen! We live in an epoch similar to that of
> Christ. We live in the midst of a society as corrupt as
> that of the Roman Empire, feeling in our inmost souls the
> need of reanimating and transforming it, and of uniting
> all its various members in one sole faith, beneath one
> sole law, in one sole aim---the free and progressive
> development of all the faculties of which God has given
> the germ to his creatures. We seek the kingdom of God *on
> earth as it is in heaven*, or, rather, that earth may
> become a preparation for heaven, and society an endeavor
> after the progressive realization of the divine idea.
>
> "But Christ's every act was the visible representation of
> the faith he preached; and around him stood apostles who
> incarnated in their actions the faith they had accepted.
> Be you such and you will conquer. Preach duty to the
> classes about you, and fulfill, as far as in you lies,
> your own. Preach virtue, sacrifice and love; and be
> yourselves virtuous, loving and ready for self-sacrifice.
> Speak your thoughts boldly, and make known your wants
> courageously; but without anger, without reaction, and
> without threats. The strongest menace, if indeed there be
> those for whom threats are necessary, will be the
> firmness, not the irritation, of your speech."

# The Rights of Man

There are those who, when it suits their purpose, say that
there are no natural rights, but that all rights spring from
the grant of the sovereign political power. It were waste of
time to argue with such persons. There are some facts so
obvious as to be beyond the necessity of argument. And one
of these facts, attested by universal consciousness, is that
there are rights as between man and man which existed before
the formation of government, and which continue to exist in
spite of the abuse of government; that there is a higher law
than any human law---to wit, the law of the Creator,
impressed upon and revealed through nature, which is before
and above human laws, and upon conformity to which all human
laws must depend for their validity. To deny this is to
assert that there is no standard whatever by which the
rightfulness or wrongfulness of laws and institutions can be
measured; to assert that there can be no actions in
themselves right and none in themselves wrong; to assert
that an edict which commanded mothers to kill their children
should receive the same respect as a law prohibiting
infanticide.

These natural rights, this higher law, form the only true
and sure basis for social organization. Just as, if we would
construct a successful machine, we must conform to physical
laws, such as the law of gravitation, the law of combustion,
the law of expansion, etc.; just as, if we would maintain
bodily health, we must conform to the laws of physiology;
so, if we would have a peaceful and healthful social state,
we must conform our institutions to the great moral
laws---laws to which we are absolutely subject, and which
are as much above our control as are the laws of matter and
of motion. And as, when we find that a machine will not
work, we infer that in its construction some law of physics
has been ignored or defied, so when we find social disease
and political evils may we infer that in the organization of
society moral law has been defied and the natural rights of
man have been ignored.

These natural rights of man are thus set forth in the
American Declaration of Independence as the basis upon which
alone legitimate government can rest:

> "We hold these truths to be self-evident---that all men
> are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator
> with certain unalienable rights; that among these are
> life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that, to
> secure these rights, governments are instituted among men,
> deriving their just powers from the consent of the
> governed; that, whenever any form of government becomes
> destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people
> to alter or to abolish it, and to institute a new
> government, laying its foundations on such principles, and
> organizing its powers in such form, as shall seem to them
> most likely to affect their safety and happiness."

So does the preamble to the Constitution of the United
States appeal to the same principles:

> "We, the people of the United States, in order to form a
> more perfect union, *establish justice*, insure domestic
> tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the
> general welfare, and *secure the blessings of liberty to
> ourselves and our posterity* do ordain and establish this
> Constitution for the United States of America."

And so, too, is the same fundamental and self-evident truth
set forth in that grand Declaration of the Eights of Man and
of Citizens, issued by the National Assembly of France in
1789:

> "The representatives of the people of France, formed into
> a National Assembly, *considering that ignorance, neglect,
> or contempt of human rights are the sole causes of public
> misfortunes and corruptions of government*, have resolved
> to set forth, in a solemn declaration, those natural,
> imprescriptible and inalienable rights," and do"recognize
> and declare, in the presence of the Supreme Being, and
> with the hope of His blessing and favor, the following
> sacred rights of men and of citizens:
>
> "1. Men are born and always continue free and equal in
> respect of their rights. Civil distinctions, therefore,
> can only be founded on public utility.
>
> "2. The end of all political associations is the
> preservation of the natural and imprescriptible rights of
> man, and these rights are liberty, property, security, and
> resistance of oppression."

It is one thing to assert the eternal principles, as they
are asserted in times of upheaval, when men of convictions
and of the courage of their convictions come to the front,
and another thing for a people just emerging from the night
of ignorance and superstition, and enslaved by habits of
thought formed by injustice and oppression, to adhere to and
carry them out. The French people have not been true to
these principles, nor yet, with far greater advantages, have
we. And so, though the ancient *régime*, with its blasphemy
of "right divine," its Bastille and its *letters de cachet*,
have been abolished in France; there have come red terror
and white terror. Anarchy masquerading as Freedom, and
Imperialism deriving its sanction from universal suffrage,
culminating in such a poor thing as the French Republic of
to-day. And here, with our virgin soil, with our exemption
from foreign complications, and our freedom from powerful
and hostile neighbors, all we can show is another poor thing
of a Republic, with its rings and its bosses, its railroad
kings controlling sovereign states, its gangrene of
corruption eating steadily toward the political heart, its
tramps and its strikes, its ostentation of ill-gotten
wealth, its children toiling in factories, and its women
working out their lives for bread!

It is possible for men to see the truth, and assert the
truth, and to hear and repeat, again and again, formulas
embodying the truth, without realizing all that that truth
involves. Men who signed the Declaration of Independence, or
applauded the Declaration of Independence, men who year
after year read it, and heard it, and honored it, did so
without thinking that the eternal principles of right which
it invoked condemned the existence of negro slavery as well
as the tyranny of George III. And many who, awakening to the
fuller truth, asserted the unalienable rights of man against
chattel slavery, did not see that these rights involved far
more than the denial of property in human flesh and blood;
and as vainly imagined that they had fully asserted them
when chattel slaves had been emancipated and given the
suffrage, as their fathers vainly imagined they had fully
asserted them, when they threw ofl?" allegiance to the
English king and established here a democratic republic.

The common belief of Americans of to-day is that among us
the equal and unalienable rights of man are now all
acknowledged, while as for poverty, crime, low wages, "over
production," political corruption, and so on, they are to be
referred to the nature of things---that is to say, if any
one presses for a more definite answer, they exist because
it is the will of God, the Creator, that they should exist.
Yet I believe that these evils are demonstrably due to our
failure to fully acknowledge the equal and unalienable
rights with which, as asserted as a self-evident truth by
the Declaration of Independence, all men have been endowed
by God, their Creator. I believe the National Assembly of
France were right when, a century ago, inspired by the same
spirit that gave us political freedom, they declared that
the great cause of public misfortunes and corruptions of
government is ignorance, neglect, or contempt of human
rights. And just as the famine which was then decimating
France, the bankruptcy and corruption of her Government, the
brutish degradation of her working classes, and the
demoralization of her aristocracy, were directly traceable
to the denial of the equal, natural and imprescriptible
rights of men, so now the social and political problems
which menace the American republic, in common with the whole
civilized world, spring from the same cause.

Let us consider the matter. The equal, natural and
unalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness, does it not involve the right of each to the free
use of his powers in making a living for himself and his
family, limited only by the equal right of all others? Does
it not require that each shall be free to make, to save and
to enjoy what wealth he may, without interference with the
equal rights of others; that no one shall be compelled to
give forced labor to another, or to yield up his earnings to
another; that no one shall be permitted to extort from
another labor or earnings? All this goes without the saying.
Any recognition of the equal right to life and liberty which
would deny the right to property---the right of a man to his
labor and to the full fruits of his labor, would be mockery.

But that is just what we do. Our so-called recognition of
the equal and natural rights of man is to large classes of
our people nothing but a mockery, and as social pressure
increases, is becoming a more bitter mockery to larger
classes, because our institutions fail to secure the rights
of men to their labor and the fruits of their labor.

That this denial of a primary human right is the cause of
poverty on the one side and of overgrown fortunes on the
other, and of all the waste and demoralization and
corruption that flow from the grossly unequal distribution
of wealth, may be easily seen.

As I am speaking of conditions general oyer the whole
civilized world, let us first take the case of another
country, for we can sometimes see the faults of our
neighbors more clearly than our own. England, the country
from which we derive our language and institutions, is
behind us in the formal recognition of political liberty;
but there is as much industrial liberty there as here---and
in some respects more, for England, though she has not yet
reached free trade, has got rid of the "protective" swindle,
which we still hug. And the English people---poor
things---are, as a whole, satisfied of their freedom, and
boast of it. They think, for it has been so long preached to
them that most of them honestly believe it, that Englishmen
are the freest people in the world, and they sing "Britons
never shall be slaves," as though it were indeed true that
slaves could not breathe British air.

Let us take a man of the masses of this people---a
"free-born Englishman," coming of long generations of
"free-born Englishmen," in Wiltshire or Devonshire or
Somersetshire, on soil which, if you could trace his
genealogy, you would find his fathers have been tilling from
early Saxon times. He grows to manhood, we will not stop to
inquire how, and, as is the natural order, he takes himself
a wife. Here he stands, a man among his fellows, in a world
in which the Creator has ordained that he should get a
living by his labor. He has wants, and as, in the natural
order, children come to him, he will have more; but he has
in brain and muscle the natural power to satisfy these wants
from the storehouse of nature. He knows how to dig and plow,
to sow and to reap, and there is the rich soil, ready now,
as it was thousands of years ago, to give back wealth to
labor. The rain falls and the sun shines, and as the planet
circles around her orbit, Spring follows Winter, and Summer
succeeds Spring. It is this man's first and clearest right
to earn his living, to transmute his labor into wealth, and
to possess and enjoy that wealth for his own sustenance and
benefit, and for the sustenance and benefit of those whom
nature places in dependence on him. He has no right to
demand any one else's earnings, nor has any one else a right
to demand any portion of his earnings. He has no right to
compel any one else to work for his benefit; nor have others
a right to demand that he shall work for their benefit. This
right to himself, to the use of his own powers and the
results of his own exertions, is a natural, self-evident
right, which, as a matter of principle, no one can dispute,
save upon the blasphemous contention that some men were
created to work for other men. And this primary, natural
right to his own labor, and to the fruits of his own labor,
accorded, this man can abundantly provide for his own needs
and for the needs of his family. His labor will, in the
natural order, produce wealth, which, exchanged in
accordance with mutual desires for wealth which others have
produced, will supply his family with all the material
comforts of life, and in the absence of serious accident,
enable him to bring up his children, and lay by such a
surplus that he and his wife may take their rest, and enjoy
their sunset hour in the declining years when strength shall
fail, without asking any one's alms or being beholden to any
bounty save that of "Our Father which art in heaven."

But what is the fact? The fact is, that the right of this
"free-born Englishman" to his own labor and the fruits of
his labor is denied as fully and completely as though he
were made by law a slave; that he is compelled to work for
the enrichment of others as truly as though English law had
made him the property of an owner. The law of the land does
not declare that he is a slave: on the contrary, it formally
declares that he is a free man---free to work for himself,
and free to enjoy the fruits of his labor. But a man cannot
labor.without something to labor on, any more than he can
eat without having something to eat. It is not in human
powers to make something out of nothing. This is not
contemplated in the creative scheme. Nature tells us that if
we will not work we must starve; but at the same time
supplies us with everything necessary to work. Food,
clothing, shelter, all the articles that minister to desire
and that we call wealth, can be produced by labor, but only
when the raw material of which they must be composed is
drawn from the land.

To drop a man in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean and tell
him he is at liberty to walk ashore, would not be more
bitter irony than to place a man where all the land is
appropriated as the property of other people and to tell him
that he is a free man, at liberty to work for himself and to
enjoy his own earnings. That is the situation in which our
Englishman finds himself. He is just as free as he would be
were he suspended over a precipice while somebody else held
a sharp knife to the rope; just as free as if thirsting in a
desert he found the only spring for miles walled and guarded
by armed men who told him he could not drink unless h.Q
freely contracted with them on their terms. Had this
Englishman lived generations ago, in the time of his Saxon
ancestors, he would, when he became of age, and had taken a
wife, been allotted his house-plot and his seed-plot; he
would have had an equal share in the great fields which the
villagers cultivated together, he would have been free to
gather his fagots or take game in the common wood, or to
graze his beasts on the common pasturage. Even a few
generations ago, after the land-grabbing that began with the
Tudors had gone on for some centuries, he would have found
in yet existing commons some faint survival of the ancient
principle that this planet was intended for all men, not for
some men. But now he finds every foot of land inclosed
against him. The fields which his forefathers tilled, share
and share alike, are the private property of "my lord," who
rents it out to large farmers on terms so high that, to get
ordinary interest on their capital, they must grind the
faces of their laborers; the ancient woodland is inclosed by
a high wall, topped with broken glass, and is patrolled by
gamekeepers with loaded guns and the authority to take any
intruder before the magistrate, who will send him to prison;
the old-time common has become "my lord's" great park, on
which *his* fat cattle graze, and *his* supple-limbed deer
daintily browse. Even the old footpaths that gave short cuts
from road to road, through hazel-thicket and by tinkling
brook, are now walled in.

But this "free-born Englishman," this Briton who never shall
be a slave, cannot live without land. He must find some bit
of the earth's surface on which he and his wife can rest,
which they may call "home." But, save the high-roads, there
is not as much of their native land as they may cover with
the soles of their feet, that they can use without some
other human creature's permission; and on the high-road they
would not be suffered to lie down, still less to make them a
bower of leaves. So, to to get living space in his native
land, our "free-born Englishman" must consent to work so
many days in the month for one of the "owners" of England,
or, what amounts to the same thing, he must sell his labor,
or the fruits of his labor, to some third party and pay the
"owner" of some particular part of the planet for the
privilege of living on the planet. Having thus sacrificed a
part of his labor to get permission from another
fellow-creature to live, if he can, our free-born Englishman
must next go to work to procure food, clothing, etc. But as
he cannot get to work without land to work on, he is
compelled, instead of going to work for himself, to sell his
labor to those who have land on such terms as they please,
and those terms are only enough to just support life in the
most miserable fashion---that is to saj, all the produce of
his labor is taken from him, and lie is given back out of it
just what the hardest owner would be forced to give the
slave---enough to support life on. He lives in a miserable
hovel, with its broken floor on the bare ground, and an
ill-kept thatch, through which the rain comes. He works from
morning to night, and his wife must do the same; and their
children, as soon almost as they can walk, must also go to
work, pulling weeds, or scaring away crows, or doing such
like jobs for the landowner, who graciously lets them live
and work on his land. Illness often comes, and death too
often. Then there is no recourse but the parish or "My Lady
Bountiful," the wife or daughter, or almoner of "the God
Almighty of the county-side," as Tennyson calls him,---the
owner (if not the maker) of the world in these parts, who
doles out in insulting and degrading charity some little
stint of the wealth appropriated from the labor of this
family and of other such families. If he does not "order
himself lowly and reverently to all his betters"; if he does
not pull his poor hat off his sheepish head whenever "my
lord" or "my lady," or "his honor," or any of their
understrappers, go by; he does not bring up his children in
the humility which these people think proper and becoming in
the "lower classes"; if there is suspicion that he may have
helped himself to an apple or snared a hare, or slyly hooked
a fish from the stream, this "free-born Englishman" loses
charity and loses work. He must go on the parish or starve.
He becomes bent and stiff before his time. His wife is old
and worn, when she ought to be in her prime of strength and
beauty. His girls---such as live---marry such as he, to lead
such lives as their mother's, or, perhaps, are seduced by
their "betters," and sent, with a few pounds, to a great
town, to die in a few years in brothel, or hospital, or
prison. His boys grow up ignorant and brutish; they cannot
support him when he grows old, even if they would, for they
do not get back enough of the proceeds of their labor. The
only refuge for the pair in their old age is the almshouse,
where, for shame to let them starve on the roadside, these
worked-out slaves are kept to die,---where the man is
separated from the wife, and the old couple, over whom the
parson of the church, by law established, has said, "Whom
God hath joined together let no man put asunder," lead,
apart from each other, a prison-like existence until death
comes to their relief.

In what is the condition of such a "free-born Englishman" as
this, better than that of a slave? Yet if this is not a fair
picture of the condition of the English agricultural
laborers, it is only because I have not dwelt upon the
darkest shades---the sodden ignorance and brutality, the low
morality of these degraded and debased classes. In quantity
and quality of food, in clothing and housing, in ease and
recreation, and in morality, there can be no doubt that the
average Southern slave was better off than the average
agricultural laborer is in England to-day---that his life
was healthier and happier and fuller. So long as a plump,
well-kept, hearty negro was worth \$1,000, no slave-owner,
selfish or cold-blooded as he might be, would keep his
negroes as great classes of "free-born Englishmen" must
live. But these white slaves have no money-value. It is not
the labor, it is the land that commands the labor, that has
a capitalized value. You can get the labor of men for from
nine to twelve shillings a week---less than it would cost to
keep a slave in good marketable condition, and of children
for sixpence a week, and when they are worked out they can
be left to die or "go on the parish."

The negroes, some say, are an inferior race. But these white
slaves of England are of the stock that has given England
her scholars and her poets, her philosophers and statesmen,
her merchants and inventors, who have formed the bulwark of
the sea-girt isle, and have carried the meteor flag around
the world. They are ignorant, and degraded, and debased;
they live the life of slaves and die the death of paupers,
simply because they are robbed of their natural rights.

In the same neighborhood in which you may find such people
as these, in which you may see squalid laborers' cottages
where human beings huddle together like swine, you may also
see grand mansions set in great, velvety, oak-graced parks,
the habitations of local "God Almighty," as the Laureate
styles them, and as these brutalized English people seem
almost to take them to be. They never do any work---they
pride themselves upon the fact that for hundreds of years
their ancestors have never done any work; they look with the
utmost contempt not merely upon the man who works, but even
upon the man whose grandfather had to work. Yet they live in
the utmost luxury. They have town houses and country houses,
horses, carriages, liveried servants, yachts, packs of
hounds; they have all that wealth can command in the way of
literature and education and the culture of travel. And they
have wealth to spare, which they can invest in rail-way
shares, or public debts, or in buying up land in the United
States. But not an iota of this wealth do they produce. They
get it because, it being conceded that they own the land,
the people who do produce wealth, must hand their earnings
over to them.

Here, clear and plain, is the beginning and primary cause of
that inequality in the distribution of wealth which, in
England, produces such dire, soul-destroying poverty, side
by side with such wantonness of luxury, and which is to be
seen in the cities even more glaringly than in the country.
Here, clear and plain, is the reason why labor seems a drug,
and why, in all occupations in which mere laborers can
engage, wages tend to the merest pittance on which life can
be maintained. Deprived of their natural rights to land,
treated as intruders upon God's earth, men are compelled to
an unnatural competition for the privilege of mere animal
existence, that in manufacturing towns and city slums
reduces humanity to a depth of misery and debasement in
which beings, created in the image of God, sink below the
level of the brutes.

And the same inequality of conditions which we see beginning
here, is it not due to the same primary cause? American
citizenship confers no right to American soil. The first and
most essential rights of man---the rights to life, liberty
and the pursuit of happiness are denied here as completely
as in England. And the same results must follow.

# Dumping Garbage

This gulf-stream of humanity that is setting on our shores
with increasing volume is in all respects worthy of more
attention than we give it. In many ways one of the most
important phenomena of our time, it is one which forcibly
brings to the mind the fact that we are living under
conditions which must soon begin to rapidly change. But
there is one part of the immigration coming to us this year
which is specially suggestive. A number of large steamers of
the transatlantic lines are calling, under contract with the
British Government, at small ports on the west coast of
Ireland, tilling up with men, women and children, whose
passages are paid by their government, and then, ferrying
them across the ocean, are dumping them on the wharves of
New York and Boston with a few dollars apiece in their
pockets to begin life in the New World.

The strength of a nation is in its men. It is its people
that make a country great and strong, produce its wealth,
and give it rank among other countries. Yet, here is a
civilized and Christian government, or one that jKisses for
such, shipping off its people, to be dumped upon another
continent, as garbage is shipped off from New York to be
dumped into the Atlantic Ocean. Nor are these people
undesirable material for the making of a nation. Whatever
they may sometimes become here, when cooped up in
tenement-houses and exposed to the corruption of our
politics, and to the temptation of a life greatly differing
from that to which they have been accustomed, they are in
their own country, as any one who has been among them there
can testify, a peaceable, industrious, and, in some
important respects, a peculiarly moral people, who lack
intellectual and political education, and the robust virtues
that personal independence alone can give, simply because of
the poverty to which they are condemned. Mr. Trevelyan, the
Chief Secretary for Ireland, has declared in the House of
Commons that they are physically and morally healthy, well
capable of making a living, and yet the government of which
he is a member is shipping them away at public expense as
New York ships its garbage!

These people are well capable of making a living,
Mr. Trevelyan says, yet if they remain at home they will
only be able to make the poorest of poor livings in the best
of times, and when seasons are not of the best, taxes must
be raised and alms begged to keep them alive; and so as the
cheapest way of getting rid of them, they are shipped away
at public expense.

What is the reason of this? Why is it that people, in
themselves well capable of making a living, cannot make a
living for themselves in their own country? Simply that the
natural, equal, and unalienable rights of man, with which,
as asserted by our Declaration of Independence, these human
beings have been endowed by their Creator, are denied them.
The famine, the pauperism, the misgovernment and turbulence
of Ireland, the bitter wrongs which keep aglow the fire of
Irish "sedition," and the difficulties with regard to
Ireland which perplex English statesmen, all spring from
what the National Assembly of France, in 1789, declared to
be the cause of all public misfortunes and corruptions of
government---the contempt of human rights. The Irish peasant
is forced to starve, to beg, or to emigrate; he becomes in
the eyes of those who rule him mere human garbage, to be
shipped off and dumped anywhere, because, like the English
peasant, who, after a slave's life, dies a pauper's death,
his natural rights in his native soil are denied him;
because his unalienable right to procure wealth by his own
exertions and to retain it for his own uses is refused him.

The country from which these people are shipped---and the
Government-aided emigration is as nothing compared to the
voluntary emigration---is abundantly capable of maintaining
in comfort a very much larger population than it has ever
had. There is no natural reason why in it people themselves
capable of making a living should suffer want and
starvation. The reason that they do is simply that they are
denied natural opportunities for the employment of their
labor, and that the laws permit others to extort from them
the proceeds of such labor as they are permitted to do. Of
these people who are now being sent across the Atlantic by
the English government, and dumped on our wharves with a few
dollars in their pockets, there are probably none of mature
years who have not by their labor produced wealth enough not
only to have supported them hitherto in a much higher degree
of comfort than that in which they have lived, but to have
enabled them to pay their own passage across the Atlantic,
if they wanted to come, and to have given them on landing
here a capital sufficient for a comfortable start. They are
penniless only because they have been systematically robbed
from the day of their birth to the day they left their
native shores.

A year ago I traveled through that part of Ireland from
which these Government-aided emigrants come. What surprises
an American at first, even in Connaught, is the apparent
sparseness of population, and he wonders if this can indeed
be that overpopulated Ireland of which he has heard so much.
There is plenty of good land, but on it are only fat beasts,
and sheep so clean and white that you at first think that
they must be washed and combed every morning. Once this soil
was tilled and was populous, but now you will find only
traces of ruined hamlets, and here and there the miserable
hut of a herd, who lives in a way no Terra del Fuegan could
envy. For the "owners" of this land, who live in London and
Paris, many of them never having seen their estates, find
cattle more profitable than men, and so the men have been
driven off". It is only when you reach the bog and the
rocks, in the mountains and by the seashore, that you find a
dense population. Here they are crowded together on land on
which Nature never intended men to live. It is too poor for
grazing, so the people who have been driven from the better
land are allowed to live upon it---as long as they pay their
rent. If it were not too pathetic, the patches they call
fields would make you laugh. Originally the surface of the
ground must have been about as susceptible of cultivation as
the surface of Broadway. But at the cost of enormous labor
the small stones have been picked off and piled up, though
the great boulders remain, so that it is impossible to use a
plow; and the surface of the bog has been cut away, and
manured by sea-weed brought from the shore on the backs of
men and women, till it can be made to grow something.

For such patches of rock and bog---soil it could not be
called, save by courtesy---which has been made to produce
anything only by their unremitting toil---these people are
compelled to pay their absentee landlords rents varying from
a pound to four pounds per acre, and then they must pay
another rent for the seaweed, which the surf of the wild
Atlantic throws upon the shore, before they are permitted to
take it for manure, and another rent still for the bog from
which they cut their turf As a matter of fact, these people
have to pay more for the land than they can get out of the
land. They are really forced to pay not merely for the use
of the land and for the use of the ocean, but for the use of
the air. Their rents are made up, and they manage to live in
good times, by the few shillings earned by the women, who
knit socks as they carry their creels to and from the market
or seashore; by the earnings of the men, who go over to
England every year to work as harvesters, or by remittances
sent home by husbands or children who have managed to get to
America. In spite of their painful industry the poverty of
these people is appalling. In good times they just manage to
keep above the starvation line. In bad times, when a blight
strikes their potatoes, they must eat seaweed, or beg relief
from the poor-rates, or from the charitable contributions of
the world. When so rich as to have a few chickens or a pig,
they no more think of eating them than Vanderbilt thinks of
eating his \$50,000 trotters. They are sold to help pay the
rent. In the loughs you may see fat salmon swimming in from
the sea; but, if every one of them were marked by nature
with the inscription, "Lord So-and-So, London, with the
compliments of God Almighty," they could not be more out of
the reach of these people. The best shops to be found in the
villages will have for stock a few pounds of sugar and tea
weighed out into ounce and half-ounce papers, a little
flour, two or three red petticoats, a little coarse cloth, a
few yards of flannel, and a few of cotton, some buttons and
thread, a little pig-tail tobacco, and, perhaps, a bottle or
two of "the native" hid away in the ground some distance
from the cabin, so that if the police do capture it the
shopkeeper cannot be put in jail. For the Queen must live
and the army must be supported, and the great distillers of
Dublin and Belfast and Cork, who find such a comfortable
monopoly in the excise, have churches to build and
cathedrals to renovate. So poor are these people, so little
is there in their miserable cabins, that a sub-sheriff who,
last year, superintended the eviction of near one hundred
families in one place, declared that the effects of the
whole lot were not worth £3.

But the landlords---ah! the landlords!--they live
differently. Every now and again in traveling through this
country you come across some landlord's palatial home
mansion, its magnificent grounds inclosed with high walls.
Pass inside these walls and it is almost like entering
another world. Wide stretches of rich velvety lawn, beds of
bright flowers, noble avenues of arching trees, and a
spacious mansion rich with every appointment of luxury, with
its great stables, kennels, and appurtenances of every kind.
But though they may have these luxurious home places, the
large landlords, with few exceptions, live in London or
Paris, or pass part of the year in the great cities and the
rest in Switzerland or Italy or along the shores of the
Mediterranean; and occasionally one ot them takes a trip
over here to see our new country, with its magnificent
opportunities for investing in wild lands which will soon be
as valuable as English or Irish estates. They do not have to
work; their incomes come without work on their part---all
they have to do is to spend. Some collect galleries of the
most valuable paintings, some are fanciers of old books, and
give fabulous prices for rare editions. Some of them gamble,
some keep studs of racers and costly yachts, and some get
rid of their money in ways worse than these. Even their
agents, whose business it is to extort the rent from the
Irishmen who do work, live luxuriously. But it all comes out
of the earnings of just such people as are now being dumped
on our wharves---out of their earnings, or out of what is
sent them by relatives in America, or by charitable
contributions.

It is to maintain such a system of robbery as this that
Ireland is filled with policemen and troops and spies and
informers, and a people who might be an integral part of the
British nation are made to that nation a difficulty, a
weakness and a danger. Economically, the Irish landlords are
of no more use than so many great, ravenous, destructive
beasts---packs of wolves, herds of wild elephants, or such
dragons as St. George is reported to have killed. They
produce nothing; they only consume and destroy. And what
they destroy is more even than what they consume. For, not
merely is Ireland turned into a camp of military police and
red-coated soldiery to hold down the people while they are
robbed; but the wealth producers, stripped of capital by
this robbery of their earnings, and condemned by it to
poverty and ignorance, are unable to produce the wealth
which they could and would produce did labor get its full
earnings, and were wealth left to those who make it. Surely
true statesmanship would suggest that if any one is to be
shoveled out of a country it should be those who merely
consume and destroy; not those who produce wealth.

But English statesmen think otherwise, and these surplus
Irish men and women; these garbage Irish men and women and
little children---surplus and garbage because the landlords
of Ireland have no use for them, *are* shoveled out of their
own country and dumped on our wharves. They have reached
"the land of the free and the home of the brave" just in
time for the Fourth of July, when they may hear the
Declaration of Independence, with its ringing assertion of
unalienable rights, read again in our annual national
celebration.

Have they, then, escaped from the system which in their own
country made them serfs and human garbage? Not at all. They
have not even escaped the power of their old landlords to
take from them the proceeds of their toil.

For we are not merely getting these surplus tenants of
English, Scotch and Irish landlords---we are getting the
landlords, too. Simultaneously with this emigration is going
on a movement which is making the landlords and capitalists
of Great Britain owners of vast tracts of American soil.
There is even now scarcely a large landowning family in
Great Britain that does not own even larger American
estates, and American land is becoming with them a more and
more favorite investment. These American estates of "their
graces" and "my lords" are not as yet as valuable as their
home estates, but the natural increase in our population,
augmented by emigration, will soon make them so.

Every "surplus" Irishman, Englishman or Scotchman sent over
here assists directly in sending up the value of land and
the rent of land. The stimulation of emigration from the Old
Country to this is a bright idea on the part of these
landlords of two continents. They get rid of people who, at
home, in hard times, they might have to support in some sort
of fashion, and lessen, as they think, the forces of
disaffection, while at the same time they augment the value
of their American estates.

It is not improbable that some of these evicted tenants may
find themselves over here paying rent to the very same
landlords to swell whose incomes they have so long toiled in
their old country; but whether this be so or not, their mere
coming here, by its effect in increasing the demand for
land, helps to enable those landlords to compel some others
of the people of the United States to give up to them a
portion of their earnings in return for the privilege of
living upon American soil. It is merely with this view, and
for this purpose, that the landlords of the Old World are
buying so much land in the Kew. They do not want it to live
upon; they prefer to live in London or Paris, as many of the
privileged classes of America are now learning to prefer to
live. They do not want to work it; they do not propose to
work at all. All they want with it is the power, which, as
soon as our population increases a little, its ownership
will give, of demanding the earnings of other people. And
under present conditions it is a matter, not of a generation
or two, but only of a few years, before they will be able to
draw from their American estates sums even greater than from
their Irish estates. That is to say, they will virtually own
more Americans than they now own Irishmen.

So far from these Irish immigrants having escaped from the
system that has impoverished and pauperized the masses of
the Irish people for the benefit of a few of their number,
that system has really more unrestricted sway here than in
Ireland. In spite of the fact that we read the Declaration
of Independence every Fourth of July, make a great noise and
have a great jubilation, that first of the unalienable
rights with which every man is endowed by his Creator---the
equal right to the use of the natural elements without which
wealth cannot be produced, nor even life maintained---is no
better acknowledged with us than it is in Ireland.

There is much said of "Irish landlordism," as though it were
a peculiar kind of landlordism, or a peculiarly bad kind of
landlordism. This is not so. Irish landlordism is in nothing
worse than English landlordism, or Scotch landlordism, or
American landlordism, nor are the Irish landlords harder
than any similar class. Being generally men of education and
culture, accustomed to an easy life, they are, as a whole,
less grasping towards their tenants than the farmers who
rent of them are to the laborers to whom they sublet. They
regard the land as their own, that is all, and expect to get
an income from it; and the agent who sends them the best
income they naturally regard as the best agent.

Such popular Irish leaders as Mr. Parnell and Mr. Sullivan,
when they come over here and make speeches, have a good deal
to say about the "feudal landlordism" of Ireland. This is
all humbug---an attempt to convey the impression that Irish
landlordism is something different from American
landlordism, so that American landowners will not take
offense, while Irish landowners are denounced. There is in
Ireland nothing that can be called feudal landlordism. All
the power which the Irish landlord has, all the tyranny
which he exercises, springs from his ownership of the soil,
from the legal recognition that it is his property. If
landlordism in Ire land seems more hateful than in England,
it is only because the industrial organization is more
primitive, and there are fewer intermediaries between the
man who is robbed and the man who gets the plunder. And if
either Irish or English landlordism seems more hateful than
the same system in America, it is only because this is a new
country, not yet quite fenced in. But, as a matter of law,
these "my lords" and "your graces," who are now getting
themselves far greater estates in the United States than
they have in their own country, have more power as landlords
here than there.

In Ireland, especially, the tendency of legislation for a
series of years has been to restrain the power of the
landlord in dealing with the tenant. In the United States he
has in all its fullness the unrestricted power of doing as
he pleases with his own. Rack-renting is with us the common,
almost the exclusive, form of renting. There is no long
process to be gone through with to secure an eviction, no
serving notice upon the relieving officer of the district.
The tenant whom the landlord wants to get rid of can be
"fired out" with the minimum of cost and expense.

Says the Tribune's "Broadway Lounger" incidentally in his
chatter:

> "Judge Gedney tells me that on the first of this month he
> signed no less than two hundred and fifty warrants of
> dispossession against poor tenants. His district includes
> many blocks of the most squalid variety of
> tenement-houses, and he has fully as much unpleasant work
> of this kind as any of his judicial brethren. The first of
> May is, of course, the heaviest field-day of the year for
> such business, but there are generally at the beginning of
> every month at least one hundred warrants granted. And to
> those who fret about the minor miseries of life, no more
> wholesome cure could be administered than an enforced
> attendance in a district court on such occasions. The
> lowest depths of misery are sounded. Judge Gedney says,
> too, that in the worst cases the suffering is more
> generally caused by misfortune than by idleness or
> dissipation. A man gets a felon on his hand, which keeps
> him at home until his savings are gone and all his effects
> are in the pawn-shop, and then his children fall sick or
> his wife dies, and the agent of the house, under
> instructions from the owner who is perhaps in Europe
> enjoying himself, won't wait for the rent, and serves him
> with a summons."

A while ago, when it was bitter cold, I read in the papers
an item telling how, in the city of Wilkesbarre, Pa., a
woman and her three children were found one night huddled in
a hogshead on a vacant lot, famished and almost frozen. The
story was a simple one. The man, out of work, had tried to
steal, and been sent to prison. Their rent unpaid, their
landlord had evicted them, and as the only shelter they knew
of, they had gone to the hogshead. In Ireland, bad as it is,
the relieving-officer would have had to be by to have
offered them at least the shelter of the almshouse.

These Irish men and women who are being dumped on our
wharves with two or three dollars in their pockets, do they
find access to nature any freer here than there? Far out in
the West, if they know where to go, and can get there, they
may, for a little while yet; but though they may see even
around New York plenty of unused land, they will find that
it all belongs to somebody. Let them go to work at what they
will, they must, here as there, give up some of their
earnings for the privilege of working, and pay some other
human creature for the privilege of living. On the whole
their chances will be better here than there, for this is
yet a new country, and a century ago our settlements only
fringed the eastern seaboard of a vast continent. But from
the Atlantic to the Pacific we already have our human
garbage, the volume of which some of this Irish human
garbage will certainly go to swell. Wherever jou go
throughout the country the "tramp" is known; and in this
metropolitan city there are already, it is stated by the
Charity Organization Society, a quarter of a million people
who live on alms! What, in a few years more, are we to do
for a dumping-ground? Will it make our difficulty the less
that our human garbage can vote?

# Over-Production

That, as declared by the French Assembly, public misfortunes
and corruptions of government spring from ignorance, neglect
or contempt of human rights may be seen from whatever point
we look.

Consider this matter of "over-production" of which we hear
so much---to which is so commonly attributed dullness of
trade and the difficulty of finding employment. What, when
we come to think of it, can be more preposterous than to
speak in any general sense of over-production?
Over-production of wealth when there is everywhere a
passionate struggle for more wealth; when so many must stint
and strain and contrive, to get a living; when there is
poverty and actual want among large classes! Manifestly
there cannot be over-production, in any general and absolute
sense, until desires for wealth are all satisfied; until no
one wants more wealth.

Relative over-production, of course, there may be. The
production of certain commodities may be so far in excess of
the proper proportion to the production of other commodities
that the whole quantity produced cannot be exchanged for
enough of those other commodities to give the usual returns
to the labor and capital engaged in bringing them to market.
But this relative over-production is merely disproportionate
production. It may proceed from increased production of
things of one kind, or from decreased production of things
of other kinds.

Thus, what we would call an over-production of
watches---meaning not that more watches had been produced
than were wanted, but that more had been produced than could
be sold at a remunerative price---would be purely relative.
It might arise from an increase in the production of
watches, outrunning the ability to purchase watches; or from
a decrease in the production of other tilings, lessening the
ability to purchase watches. No matter how much the
production of watches were to increase, within the limits of
the desire for watches, it would not be over-production, if
at the same time the production of other things increased
sufficiently to allow a proportionally increased quantity of
other things to be given for the increased quantity of
watches. And no matter how much the production of watches
might be decreased, there would be relative over-production,
if at the same time the production of other things were
decreased in such proportion as to diminish in greater
degree the ability to give other things for watches.

In short, desire continuing, the over-production of
particular commodities can only be relative to the
production of other commodities, and may result from unduly
increased production in some branches of industry, or from
the checking of production in other branches. But while the
phenomena of over-production may thus arise from causes
directly operating to increase production, or from causes
directly operating to check production, just as the
equipoise of a pair of scales may be disturbed by the
addition or the removal of a weight, there are certain
symptoms by which we may determine from which of these two
kinds of causes any disturbance proceeds. For while to a
limited extent, and in a limited field, these diverse causes
may produce similar effects, their general effects will be
widely different. The increase of production in any branch
of industry tends to the general increase of production; the
checking of production in any branch of industry tends to
the general checking of production.

This may be seen from the different general effects which
follow increase or diminution of production in the same
branch of industry. Let us suppose that from the discovery
of new mines, the improvement of machinery, the breaking up
of combinations that control it, or any other cause, there
is a great and rapid increase in the production of coal, out
of proportion to the increase of other production. In a free
market the price of coal therefore falls. The effect is to
enable all consumers of coal to somewhat increase their
consumption of coal, and to somewhat increase their
consumption of other things, and to stimulate production, by
reducing cost, in all those branches of industry into which
the use of coal directly or indirectly enters. Thus the
general effect is to increase production, and to beget a
tendency to re-establish the equilibrium between the
production of coal and the production of other things, by
raising the aggregate production.

But let the coal operators and syndicates, as they
frequently do, determine to stop or reduce the production of
coal in order to raise prices. At once a large body of men
engaged in producing coal find their power of purchasing cut
off or decreased. Their demand for commodities they
habitually use thus falls off; demand and production in
other branches of industry are lessened, and other
consumers, in turn, are obliged to decrease their demands.
At the same time the enhancement in the price of coal tends
to increase the cost of production in all branches of
industry in which coal is used, and to diminish the amount
both of coal and of other things which the users of coal can
call for. Thus the check to production is perpetuated
through all branches of industry, and when the
re-establishment of equilibrium between the production of
coal and the production of other things is effected, it is
on a diminished scale of aggregate production.

All trade, it is to be remembered, is the exchange of
commodities for commodities---money being merely the measure
of values and the instrument for conveniently and
economically effecting exchanges. Demand (which is a
different tiling from desire, as it involves purchasing
power) is the asking for things in exchange for an
equivalent value of other things. Supply is the offering of
things in exchange for an equivalent value of other things.
These terms are therefore relative; demand involves supply,
and supply involves demand. Whatever increases the quantity
of things offered in exchange for other things at once
increases supply and augments demand. And, reversely,
whatever checks the bringing of things to market at once
reduces supply and decreases demand.

Thus, while the same primary effect upon the relative supply
of and demand for any particular commodity or group of
commodities may be caused either by augmentation of the
supply of such commodities, or by reduction in the supply of
other commodities---in the one case, the general effect will
be to stimulate trade, by calling out greater supplies of
other commodities, and increasing aggregate demand; and in
the other case, to depress trade, by lessening aggregate
demand and diminishing supply. The equation of supply and
demand between agricultural productions and manufactured
goods might thus be altered in the same direction and to the
same extent by such prosperous seasons or improvements in
agriculture as would reduce the price of agricultural
productions as compared with manufactured goods, or by such
restrictions upon the production or exchange of manufactured
goods as would raise their price as compared with
agricultural productions. But in the one case, the aggregate
produce of the community would be increased. There would not
only be an increase of agricultural products, but the
increased demand thus caused would stimulate the production
of manufactured goods; while this prosperity in
manufacturing industries, by enabling those engaged in them
to increase their demand for agricultural productions, would
react upon agriculture. In the other case, the aggregate
produce would be decreased. The increase in the price of
manufactured goods would compel farmers to reduce their
demands, and this would in turn reduce the ability of those
engaged in manufacturing to demand farm products. Thus trade
would slacken, and production be checked in all directions.
That this is so, we may see from the different general
effects which result from good crops and poor crops, though
to an individual farmer high prices may compensate for a
poor yield.

To recapitulate: Relative over-production may proceed from
causes which increase, or from causes which diminish,
production. But increased production in any branch of
industry tends to increase production in all; to stimulate
trade and augment the general prosperity; and any
disturbance of equilibrium thus caused must be speedily
readjusted. Diminished production in any branch of industry,
on the other hand, tends to decrease production in all; to
depress trade, and lessen the general prosperity; and
depression thus produced tends to perpetuate itself through
larger circles, as in one branch of industry after another
the check to production reduces the power to demand the
products of other branches of industry.

Whoever will consider the widespread phenomena which are
currently attributed to over-production can have no doubt
from which of these two classes of causes they spring. He
will see that they are symptoms, not of the excess of
production, but of the restriction and strangulation of
production.

There are with us many restrictions of production, direct
and indirect; for production, it must be remembered,
involves the transportation and exchange as well as the
making of things. And restrictions imposed upon commerce or
any of its instruments may operate to discourage production
as fully as restrictions imposed upon agriculture or
manufactures. The tariff which we maintain for the express
purpose of hampering our foreign commerce, and restricting
the free exchange of our own productions for the productions
of other nations, is in effect a restriction upon
production. The monopolies which we have created or
permitted to grow up, and which levy their toll upon
internal commerce, or by conspiracy and combination diminish
supply, and artificially enhance prices, restrict production
in the same way; while the taxes levied upon certain
manufactures by our internal revenue system directly
restrict production.

So, too, is production discouraged by the direct taxes
levied by our states, counties and municipalities, which in
the aggregate exceed the taxation of the Federal government.
These taxes are generally levied upon all property, real and
personal, at the same rate, and fall partly on land, which
is not the result of production, and partly on things which
are the result of production; but insomuch as buildings and
improvements are not only thus taxed, but the land so built
upon and improved is universally rated at a much higher
assessment, and generally at a very much higher assessment,
than unused land of the same quality,even the taxation that
falls upon land values largely operates as a deterrent to
production.

To produce, to improve, is thus fraught with a penalty. We,
in fact, treat the man who produces wealth, or accumulates
wealth, as though he had done something which public policy
calls upon us to discourage. If a house is erected, or a
steamship or a factory is built, down comes the tax-gatherer
to fine the men who have done such things. If a farmer go
upon vacant land, which is adding nothing to the wealth of
the community, reclaim it, cultivate it, cover it with
crops, or stock it with cattle, we not only make him pay for
having thus increased wealth, but, as an additional
discouragement to the doing of such things, we tax him very
much more on the value of his land than we do the man who
holds an equal piece idle. So, too, if a man saves, our
taxes operate to punish him for his thrift. Thus is
production checked in every direction.

But this is not all. There is with us a yet greater cheek to
production.

If there be in this universe superior intelligences engaged,
with higher powers, in the study of its infinite marvels,
who sometimes examine the speck we tenant with such studious
curiosity as our microscopists watch the denizens of a drop
of water, the manner in which, in such a country as this,
population is distributed, must greatly puzzle them. In our
cities they find people packed together so closely that they
live over one another in tiers; in the country they see
people separated so widely that they lose all the advantages
of neighborhood. They see buildings going up in the
outskirts of our towns, while much more available lots
remain vacant. They see men going great distances to
cultivate land while there is yet plenty of land to
cultivate in the localities from which they come and through
which they pass. And as these higher intelligences watch
this process of settlement through whatever sort of
microscopes they may require to observe such creatures as
we, they must notice that, for the most part, these
settlers, instead of being attracted by each other, leave
between each other large patches of unused land. If there be
in the universe any societies which have the same relation
to us as our learned societies have to ants and animalculae,
these phenomena must lead to no end of curious theories.

Take in imagination such a bird's-eje view of the city of
New York as might be had from a balloon. The houses are
climbing heavenward---ten, twelve, even fifteen stories,
tier on tier of people, living, one family above another,
without sufficient water, without sufficient light or air,
without playground or breathing space. So close is the
building that the streets look like narrow rifts in the
brick and mortar, and from street to street the solid blocks
stretch until they almost meet; in the newer districts only
a space of twenty feet, a mere crack in the masonry through
which at high noon a sun-beam can scarcely struggle down,
being left to separate the backs of the tenements fronting
on one street from the backs of those fronting on another
street. Yet, around this city, and within easy access of its
center, there is plenty of vacant land; within the city
limits, in fact, not one-half the land is built upon; and
many blocks of tall tenement houses are surrounded by vacant
lots. If the improvement of our telescopes were to show us
on another planet, lakes where the water, instead of
presenting a level surface, ruffled only by the action of
the wind, stood up here and there in huge columns, it could
hardly perplex us more than these phenomena must perplex
such extramundane intelligences as I have supposed. How is
it, they may well speculate, that the pressure of population
which piles families, tier on tier, above each other, and
raises such towering warehouses and workshops, does not
cover this vacant land with buildings and with homes? Some
restraining cause there must be; but what, it might well
puzzle them to tell.

A South Sea Islander, however---one of the old heathen sort,
whom, in civilizing, we have well nigh exterminated, might
make a guess. If one of their High Chiefs tabooed a place or
object, no one of the common sort of these superstitious
savages dare use or touch it. He must go around for miles
rather than set his feet on a tabooed path; must parch or
die with thirst rather than drink of a tabooed spring; must
go hungry though the fruit of a tabooed grove rotted on the
ground before his eyes. A South Sea Islander would say that
this vacant land must be "taboo." And he would be not far
from the truth. This land is vacant, simply because it is
cursed by that form of the taboo which we superstitiously
venerate under the names of "private property" and "vested
rights."

The invisible barrier but for which buildings would rise and
the city would spread, is the high price of land, a price
that increases the more certainly it is seen that a growing
population needs the land. Thus the stronger the incentive
to the use of land, the .higher the barrier that arises
against its use. Tenement houses are built among vacant lots
because the price that must be paid for land is so great
that people who have not large means must economize their
use of land by living one family above another.

While in all of our cities the value of land, which
increases not merely with their growth, but with the
expectation of growth, thus operates to check building and
improvement, its effect is manifested through the country in
a somewhat different way. Instead of unduly crowding people
together it unduly separates them. The expectation of profit
from the rise in the value of land leads those who take up
new land, not to content themselves with what they may most
profitably use, but to get all the land they can, even
though they must let a great part of it lie idle; and large
tracts are seized upon by those who make no pretense of
using any part of it, but merely calculate to make a profit
out of others who in time will be driven to use it. Thus
population is scattered, not only to loss of all the
comforts, refinements, pleasures and stimulations that come
from neighborhood, but to the great loss of productive
power. The extra cost of constructing and maintaining roads
and railways, the greater distances over which produce and
goods must be transported, the difficulties which separation
interposes to that commerce between men which is necessary
even to the ruder forms of modern production, all retard and
lessen production. While just as the high value of land in
and about a great city make more difficult the erection of
buildings, so does increase in the value of agricultural
land make improvement difficult. The higher the value of
land the more capital does the farmer require if he buys
outright; or, if he buys on installments, or rents, the more
of his earnings must lie give up every year. Men who would
eagerly improve and cultivate land could it be had for the
using are thus turned away---to wander long distances and
waste their means in looking for better opportunities; to
swell the ranks of those seeking for employment as wage
workers; to go back to the cities or manufacturing villages
in the endeavor to make a living; or to remain idle,
frequently for long periods, and sometimes until they become
utterly demoralized and worse than useless tramps.

Thus is production checked in those vocations which form the
foundation for all others. This check to the production of
some forms of wealth lessens demand for other forms of
wealth, and so the effect is propagated from one branch of
industry to another, begetting the phenomena that are spoken
of as over-production, but which are primarily due to
restricted production.

And as land values tend to rise, not merely with the growth
of population and wealth, but with the expectation of that
growth, thus enlisting in pushing on the upward movement,
the powerful and illusive sentiment of hope, there is a
constant tendency, especially strong in rapidly growing
countries, to carry up the price of land beyond the point at
which labor and capital can profitably engage in production,
and the only check to this is the refusal of labor and
capital to so engage. This tendency becomes peculiarly
strong in recurring periods, when the fever of speculation
runs high, and leads at length to a correspondingly general
and sudden check to production, which propagating itself (by
checking demand) through all branches of industry, is the
main cause of those paroxysms known as commercial or
industrial depressions, and which are marked by wasting
capital, idle labor, stocks of goods that cannot be sold
without loss, and widespread want and suffering. It is true
that other restrictions upon the free play of productive
forces operate to promote, intensify and continue these
dislocations of the industrial system, but that here is the
main and primary cause I think there can be no doubt.

And this, perhaps, is even more clear: That from whatever
cause disturbance of industrial and commercial relations may
originally come, these periodical depressions in which
demand and supply seem unable to meet and satisfy each other
could not become widespread and persistent did productive
forces have free access to land. Nothing like general and
protracted congestion of capital and labor could take place
were this natural vent open. The moment symptoms of relative
over-production manifested themselves in any derivative
branch of industry, the turning of capital and labor toward
those occupations which extract wealth from the soil would
give relief.

Thus may we see that those public misfortunes which we speak
of as "business stagnation" and "hard times," those public
misfortunes that in periods of intensity cause more loss and
suffering than great wars, spring truly from our ignorance
and contempt of human rights; from our disregard of the
equal and inalienable right of all men to freely apply to
nature for the satisfaction of their needs, and to retain
for their own uses the full fruits of their labor.

# Unemployed Labor

How contempt of human rights is the essential element in
building up the great fortunes whose growth is such a marked
feature of our development, we have already seen. And just
as clearly may we see that from the same cause spring
poverty and pauperism. The tramp is the complement of the
millionaire.

Consider this terrible phenomenon, the tramp---an appearance
more menacing to the republic than that of hostile armies
and fleets bent on destruction. What is the tramp? In the
beginning, he is a man able to work, and willing to work,
for the satisfaction of his needs; but who, not finding
opportunity to work where he is, starts out in quest of it;
who, failing in this search, is, in a later stage, driven by
those imperative needs to beg or to steal, and so, losing
self-respect, loses all that animates and elevates and
stimulates a man to struggle and to labor; becomes a
vagabond and an outcast---a poisonous pariah, avenging on
society the wrong that he keenly, but vaguely, feels has
been done him by society.

Yet the tramp, known as he is now from the Atlantic to the
Pacific, is only a part of the phenomenon. Behind him,
though not obtrusive, save in what we call "hard times,"
there is, even in what we now consider normal times, a great
mass of unemployed labor which is unable, unwilling, or not
yet forced to tramp, but which bears to the tramp the same
relation that the submerged part of an iceberg does to that
much smaller part which shows above the surface.

The difficulty which so many men who would gladly work to
satisfy their needs find in obtaining opportunity of doing
so, is so common as to occasion no surprise, nor, save when
it becomes particularly intensified, to arouse any inquiry.
We are so used to it, that although we all know that work is
in itself distasteful, and that there never yet was a human
being who wanted work for the sake of work, we have got into
the habit of thinking and talking as though work were in
itself a boon. So deeply is this idea implanted in the
common mind that we maintain a policy based on the notion
that the more work we do for foreign nations and the less we
allow them to do for us, the better oft' we shall be; and in
public and in private we hear men lauded and enterprises
advocated because they "furnish employment"; while there are
many who, with more or less definiteness, hold the idea that
labor-saving inventions have operated injuriously by
lessening the amount of work to be done.

Manifestly, work is not an end, but a means; manifestly,
there can be no real scarcity of work, which is but the
means of satisfying material wants, until human wants are
all satisfied. How, then, shall we explain the obvious facts
which lead men to think and speak as though work were in
itself desirable?

When we consider that labor is the producer of all wealth,
the creator of all values, is it not strange that labor
should experience difficulty in finding employment? The
exchange for commodities of that which gives value to all
commodities, ought to be the most certain and easy of
exchanges. One wishing to exchange labor for food or
clothing, or any of the manifold things which labor
produces, is like one wishing to exchange gold-dust for
coin, cotton for cloth, or wheat for flour. Nay, this is
hardly a parallel; for, as the terms upon which the exchange
of labor for commodities takes place are usually that the
labor is first rendered, the man who offers labor in
exchange generally proposes to produce and render value
before value is returned to him.

This being the case, why is not the competition of employers
to obtain workmen as great as the competition of workmen to
find employment? Why is it that we do not consider the man
who does work as the obliging party, rather than the man
who, as we say, furnishes work?

So it necessarily would be, if in saying that labor is the
producer of wealth, we stated the whole case. But labor is
only the producer of wealth in the sense of being the active
factor of production. For the production of wealth, labor
must have access to pre-existing substance and natural
forces. Man has no power to bring something out of nothing.
He cannot create an atom of matter or initiate the slightest
motion. Vast as are his powers of modifying matter and
utilizing force, they are merely powers of adapting,
changing, re-combining, what previously exists. The
substance of the hand with which I write these lines, as of
the paper on which I write, has previously formed the
substance of other men and other animals, of plants, soils,
rocks, atmospheres, probably of other worlds and other
systems. And so of the force which impels my pen. All we
know of it is that it has acted and reacted through what
seem to us eternal circlings, and appears to reach this
planet from the sun. The destruction of matter and motion,
as the creation of matter and motion, are to us unthinkable.

In the human being, in some mysterious way which neither the
researches of physiologists nor the speculations of
philosophers enable us to comprehend, conscious, planning
intelligence comes into control, fur a limited time and to a
limited extent, of the matter and motion contained in the
human frame. The power of contracting and expanding human
muscles is the initial force with which the human mind acts
upon the material world. By the use of this power other
powers are utilized, und the forms and relations of matter
are changed in accordance with human desire. But how great
soever be the powder of affecting and using external nature
which human intelligence thus obtains,---and how great this
may be we are only beginning now to realize,---it is still
only the power of affecting and using what previously
exists. Without access to external nature, without the power
of availing himself of her substance and forces, man is not
merely powerless to produce anything, he ceases to exist in
the material world. He himself, in physical body at least,
is but a changing form of matter, a passing mode of motion,
that must be continually drawn from the reservoirs of
external nature.

Without either of the three elements, land, air and water,
man could not exist; but he is peculiarly a land animal,
living on its surface, and drawing from it his supplies.
Though he is able to navigate the ocean, and may some day be
able to navigate the air, he can only do so by availing
himself of materials drawn from land. Land is to him the
great storehouse of materials and reservoir of forces upon
which he must draw for his needs. And as wealth consists of
materials and products of nature which have been secured, or
modified by human exertion so as to fit them for the
satisfaction of human desires,labor is the active factor in
the production of wealth, but land is the passive factor,
without which labor can neither produce nor exist.

All this is so obvious that it may seem like wasting space
to state it. Yet, in this obvious fact lies the explanation
of that enigma that to so many seems a hopeless puzzle---the
labor question. What is inexplicable, if we lose sight of
man's absolute and constant dependence upon land, is clear
when we recognize it.

Let us suppose, as well as we can, human society in a world
as near as possible like our own, with one essential
difference. Let us suppose this imaginary world and its
inhabitants so constructed that men could support themselves
in air, and could from the material of the air produce by
their labor what they needed for nourishment and use. I do
not mean to suppose a state of things in which men might
float around like birds in the air or fishes in the ocean,
supplying the prime necessities of animal life from what
they could pick up. I am merely trying to suppose a state of
things in which men as they are, were relieved of absolute
dependence upon land for a standing place and reservoir of
material and forces. We will suppose labor to be as
necessary as with us, human desires to be as boundless as
with us, the cumulative power of labor to give to capital as
much advantage as with us, and the division of labor to have
gone as far as with us---the only difference being (the idea
of claiming the air as private property not having been
thought of) that no human creature would be compelled to
make terms with another in order to get a resting-place, and
to obtain access to the materials and force without which
labor cannot produce. In such a state of things, no matter
how minute had become the division of labor, no matter how
great had become the accumulation of capital, or how far
labor-saving inventions had been carried,---there could
never be anything that seemed like an excess of the supply
of labor over the demand for labor; there could never be any
difficulty in finding employment; and the spectacle of
willing men, having in their own brains and muscles the
power of supplying the needs of themselves and their
families, yet compelled to beg for work or for alms, could
never be witnessed. It being in the power of every one able
to labor to apply his labor directly to the satisfaction of
his needs without asking leave of any one else, that
cut-throat competition, in which men who must find
employment or starve are forced to bid against each other
could never arise.

Variations there might be in the demand for particular
commodities or services, which would produce variations in
the demand for labor in different occupations, and cause
wages in those occupations to somewhat rise above or fall
below the general level, but the ability of labor to employ
itself, the freedom ol indefinite expansion in the primary
employments, would allow labor to accommodate itself to
these variations, not merely without loss or suffering, but
so easily that they would be scarcely noticed. For
occupations shade into one an'other by imperceptible
degrees, no matter how minute the division of labor---or,
rather, the more minute the division of labor the more
insensible the gradation---so that there are in each
occupation enough who could easily pass to other
occupations, to readily allow of such contractions and
expansions as might in a state of freedom occur. The
possibility of indefinite expansion in the primary
occupations, the ability of every one to make a living by
resort to them would produce elasticity throughout the whole
industrial system.

Under such conditions capital could not oppress labor. At
present, in any dispute between capital and labor, capital
enjoys the enormous advantage of being better able to wait.
Capital wastes when not employed; but labor starves. Where,
however, labor could always employ itself, the disadvantage
in any conflict would be on the side of capital, while that
surplus of unemployed labor which enables capital to make
such advantageous bargains with labor would not exist, the
man who wanted to get others to work for him would not find
men crowding for employment, but, finding all labor already
employed, would have to offer higher wages, in order to
tempt them into his employment, than the men he wanted could
make for themselves. The competition would be that of
employers to obtain workmen, rather than that of workmen to
get employment, and thus the advantages which the
accumulation of capital gives in the production of wealth
would ( save enough to secure the accumulation and
employment of capital) go ultimately to labor. In such a
state of things, instead of thinking that the man who
employed another was doing him a favor, we would rather look
upon the man who went to work for another as the obliging
party. To suppose that under such conditions there could be
such inequality in the distribution of wealth as we now see,
would require a more violent presumption than we have made
in supposing air, instead of land, to be the element from
which wealth is chiefly derived. But supposing existing
inequalities to be translated into such a state, it is
evident that large fortunes could avail little, and continue
but a short time, there there is always labor seeking
employment on any terms; where the masses earn only a bare
living, and dismissal from employment means anxiety and
privation, and even beggary or starvation, these large
fortunes have monstrous power. But in a condition of things
where there was no unemployed labor, where every one could
make a living for himself and family without fear or favor,
what could a hundred or five hundred millions avail in the
way of enabling its possessor to extort or tyrannize?

The upper millstone alone cannot grind. That it may do so,
the nether millstone as well is needed. No amount of force
will break an eggshell if exerted on one side alone. So
capital could not squeeze labor as long as labor was free to
natural opportunities, and in a world where these natural
materials and opportunities were as free to all as is the
air to us, there could be no difficulty in finding
employment, no willing hands conjoined with hungry stomachs,
no tendency of wages toward the minimum on which the worker
could barely live. In such a world we would no more think of
thanking anybody for furnishing us employment than we here
think of thanking anybody for furnishing us with appetites.

That the Creator might have put us in the kind of world I
have sought to imagine, as readily as in this kind of a
world, I have no doubt. Why He has not done so may, however,
I think, be seen. That kind of a world would be best for
fools. This is the best for men who will use the
intelligence with which they have been gifted. Of this,
however, I shall speak hereafter. What I am now trying to do
by asking my readers to endeavor to imagine a world in which
natural opportunities were as "free as air," is to show that
the barriers which prevent labor from freely using land is
the nether millstone against which labor is ground, the true
cause of the difficulties which are apparent through the
whole industrial organization.

But it may be said, as I have often heard it said, " We do
not all want land! We cannot all become farmers! "

To this I reply that we *do* all want land, though it may be
in different ways and in varying degrees. Without land no
human being can live; without land no human occupation can
be carried on. Agriculture is not the only use of land. It
is only one of many. And just as the uppermost story of the
tallest building rests upon land as truly as the lowest, so
is the operative as truly a user of land as is the farmer.
As all wealth is in the last analysis the resultant of land
and labor, so is all production in the last analysis the
expenditure of labor upon land.

Nor is it true that we could not all become farmers. That
*is* the one thing that we might all become. If all men were
merchants, or tailors, or mechanics, all men would soon
starve. But there have been, and still exist, societies in
which all get their living directly from nature. The
occupations that resort directly to nature are the primitive
occupations, from which, as society progresses, all others
are differentiated. No matter how complex the industrial
organization, these must always remain the fundamental
occupations, upon which all other occupations rest, just as
the upper stories of a building rest upon the foundation.
Now, as ever, "the farmer feedeth all." And necessarily, the
condition of labor in these first and widest of occupations,
determines the general condition of labor, just as the level
of the ocean determines the level of all its arms and bays
and seas. Where there is a great demand for labor in
agriculture, and wages are high, there must soon be a great
demand for labor, and high wages, in all occupations. Where
it is difficult to get employment in agriculture, and wages
are low, there must soon be a difficulty of obtaining
employment, and low wages, in all occupations. Now, what
determines the demand for labor and the rate of wages in
agriculture is manifestly the ability of labor to employ
itself---that is to say, the ease with which land can be
obtained. This is the reason that in new countries, where
land is easily had, wages, not merely in agriculture, but in
all occupations, are higher than in older countries, where
land is hard to get. And thus it is that, as the value of
Land increases, wages fall, and the difficulty in finding
employment arises.

This whoever will may see by merely looking around him.
Clearly the difficulty of finding employment, the fact that
in all vocations, as a rule, the supply of labor seems to
exceed the demand for labor, springs from difficulties that
prevent labor finding employment for itself---from the
barriers that fence labor off of land. That there is a
surplus of labor in any one occupation arises from the
difficulty of finding employment in other occupations, but
for which the surplus would be immediately drained off. When
there was a great demand for clerks no bookkeeper could
suffer for want of employment. And so on, down to the
fundamental employments which directly extract wealth from
land, the opening in which of opportunities for labor to
employ itself would soon drain off any surplus in derivative
occupations. Not that every unemployed mechanic, or
operative, or clerk, could or would get himself a farm; but
that from all the various occupations enough would betake
themselves to the land to relieve any pressure for
employment.

# The Effects of Machinery

How ignorance, neglect or contempt of human rights may turn
public benefits into public misfortunes we may clearly see
if we trace the effect of labor-saving inventions.

It is not altogether from a blind dislike of innovation that
even the more thoughtful and intelligent Chinese set their
faces against the introduction into their dense population
of the labor-saving machinery of Western civilization. They
recognize the superiority which in many things invention has
given us, but to their view this superiority must ultimately
be paid for with too high a price. The Eastern mind, in
fact, regards the greater powers grasped by Western
civilization somewhat as the mediaeval European mind
regarded the powers which it believed might be gained by the
Black Art, but for which the user must finally pay in
destruction of body and damnation of soul. And there is much
in the present aspects and tendencies of our civilization to
confirm the Chinese in this view.

It is clear that the inventions and discoveries which during
this century have so enormously increased the power of
producing wealth have not proved an unmixed good. Their
benefits are not merely unequally distributed, but they are
bringing about absolutely injurious effects. They are
concentrating capital, and increasing the power of these
concentrations to monopolize and oppress; are rendering the
workman more dependent; depriving him of the advantages of
skill and of opportunities to acquire it; lessening his
control over his own condition and his hope of improving it;
cramping his mind, and in many cases distorting and
enervating his body.

It seems to me impossible to consider the present tendencies
of our industrial development without feeling that if there
be no escape from them, the Chinese philosophers are right,
and that the powers we have called into our service must
ultimately destroy us. We are reducing the cost of
production; but in doing so, are stunting children, and
unfitting women for the duties of maternity, and degrading
men into the position of mere feeders of machines. We are
not lessening the fierceness of the struggle for existence.
Though we work with an intensity and application that with
the great majority of us leaves time and power for little
else, we have increased, not decreased, the anxieties of
life. Insanity is increasing, suicide is increasing, the
disposition to shun marriage is increasing. We are
developing on the one side, enormous fortunes, but on the
other side, utter pariahs. These are symptoms of disease for
which no gains can compensate.

Yet it is manifestly wrong to attribute either necessary
good or necessary evil to the improvements and inventions
which are so changing industrial and social relations. They
simply increase power---and power may work either good or
evil as intelligence controls or fails to control it.

Let us consider the effects of the introduction of
labor-saving machinery---or rather, of all discoveries,
inventions and improvements, that increase the produce a
given amount of labor can obtain:

In that primitive state in which the labor of each family
supplies its wants, any invention or discovery which
increases the power of supplying one of these wants will
increase the power of supplying all, since the labor saved
in one direction may be expended in other directions.

When division of labor has taken place, and different parts
in production are taken by different individuals, the gain
obtained by any labor-saving improvement in one branch of
production will, in like manner, be averaged with all. If,
for instance, improvements be made in the weaving of cloth
and the working of iron, the effect will be that a bushel of
grain will exchange for more cloth and more iron, and thus
the farmer will be enabled to obtain the same quantity of
all the things he wants with less labor, or a somewhat
greater quantity with the same labor. And so with all other
producers.

Even when the improvement is kept a secret, or the inventor
is protected for a time by a patent, it is only in part that
the benefit can be retained. It is the general
characteristic of labor-saving improvements, after at least
a certain stage in the arts is reached, that the production
of larger quantities is necessary to secure the economy. And
those who have the monopoly, are impelled by their desire
for the largest profit to produce more at a lower price,
rather than to produce the same quantity at the previous
price, thus enabling the producers of other things to obtain
for less labor the particular things in the production of
which the saving has been effected, and thus diffusing part
of the benefit, and generally the largest part, over the
whole field of industry.

In this way all labor-saving inventions tend to increase the
productive power of all labor, and, except in so far as they
are monopolized, their whole benefit is thus diffused. For,
if in one occupation labor become more profitable than in
others, labor is drawn to it until the net average in
different occupations is restored. And so, where not
artificially prevented, does the same tendency bring to a
com-mon level the earnings of capital. The direct effect of
improvements and inventions which add to productive power
is, it is to be remarked, always to increase the earnings of
labor, never to increase the earnings of capital. The
advantage, even in such improvements as may seem primarily
to be rather capital-saving than labor-saving---as, for
instance, an invention which lessens the time required for
the tanning of hides---becomes a property and advantage of
labor. The reason is, not to go into a more elaborate
explanation, that labor is the active factor in production.
Capital is merely its tool and instrument. The great gains
made by particular capitalists in the utilization of
improvements, are not the gains of capital, but generally
the gains of monopoly, though sometimes they may be gains of
adventure or of management. The rate of interest, which is
the measure of the earnings of capital, has not increased
with all the enormous labor-saving improvements of our
century; on the contrary, its tendency has been to diminish.
But the requirement of larger amounts of capital, which is
generally characteristic of labor-saving improvements, may
increase the facility with which those who have large
capitals can establish monopolies that enable them to
intercept what would naturally go to labor. This, however,
is an effect, rather than a cause, of the failure of labor
to get the benefit of improvements in production.

For the cause we must go further. While labor-saving
improvements increase the power of labor, no improvement or
invention can release labor from its dependence upon land.
Labor-saving improvements only increase the power of
producing wealth from land. And land being monopolized as
the private property of certain persons, who can thus
prevent others from using it, all these gains, which accrue
primarily to labor, can be demanded from labor by the owners
of land, in higher rents and higher prices. Thus, as we see
it, the march of improvement and invention has increased
neither interest nor wages, but its general effect has
everywhere been to increase the value of land. Where
increase of wages has been won, it has been by combination,
or the concurrence of special causes; but what of the
increased productiveness which primarily attaches to labor
has been thus secured by labor is comparatively trivial.
Some part of it has gone to various other monopolies, but
the great bulk has gone to the monopoly of the soil, has
increased ground-rents and raised the value of land.

The railroad, for instance, is a great labor-saving
invention. It does not increase the quantity of grain which
the farmer can raise, nor the quantity of goods which the
manufacturer can turn out; but by reducing the cost of
transportation it increases the quantity of all the various
things which can be obtained in exchange for produce of
either kind; which practically amounts to the same thing.

These gains primarily accrue to labor; that is to say, the
advantage given by the railroad in the district which it
affects, is to save labor; to enable the same labor to
procure more wealth. But as we see where railroads are
built, it is not labor that secures the gain. The railroad
being a monopoly---and in the United States, a practically
unrestricted monopoly---as large a portion as possible of
these gains, over and above the fair returns on the capital
invested, is intercepted by the managers, who by fictitious
costs, watered stock, and in various other ways, thinly
disguise their levies, and who generally rob the
stockholders while they fleece the public. The rest of the
gain---the advantage which, after these deductions, accrues
to labor, is intercepted by the monopolists of land. As the
productiveness of labor is increased, or even as there is a
promise of its increase, so does the value of land increase,
and labor, having to pay proportionately more for land, is
shorn of all the benefit. Taught by experience, when a
railroad opens a new district we do not expect wages to
increase; what we expect to increase is the value of land.

The elevated railroads of New York are great labor-saving
machines, which have greatly reduced the time and labor
necessary to take people from one end of the city to the
other. They have made accessible to the over-crowded
population of the lower part of the island, the vacant
spaces at the upper. But they have not added to the earnings
of labor, nor made it easier for the mere laborer to live.
Some portion of the gain has been intercepted by Mr. Cyrus
Field, Mr. Samuel J. Tilden, Mr. Jay Gould, and other
managers and manipulators. Over and above this, the
advantage has gone to the owners of land. The reduction in
the time and cost of transportation has made much vacant
land accessible to an overcrowded population, but as this
land has been made accessible, so has its value risen, and
the tenement-house population is as crowded as ever. The
managers of the roads have gained some millions; the owners
of the land affected, some hundreds of millions; but the
working classes of New York are no better off. What they
gain in improved transportation they must pay in increased
rent.

And so would it be with any improvement or material
benefaction. Supposing the very rich men of New York were to
become suddenly imbued with that public spirit which shows
itself in the Astor Library and the Cooper Institute, and
that it should become among them a passion, leading them
even to beggar themselves in the emulation to benefit their
fellow citizens. Supposing such a man as Mr. Gould were to
make the elevated roads free, were to assume the cost of the
Fire Department, and give every house a free telephone
connection; and Mr. Vanderbilt, not to be outdone, were to
assume the cost of putting down good pavements, and cleaning
the streets, and running the horse cars for nothing; while
the Astors were to build libraries in every ward. Supposing
the fifty, twenty, ten, and still smaller millionaires,
seized by the same passion, were singly or together, at
their own cost, to bring in plentiful supplies of water; to
furnish heat, light and power free of charge; to improve and
maintain the schools; to open theaters and concerts to the
public; to establish public gardens and baths and markets;
to open stores where everything could be bought at retail
for the lowest wholesale price;--in short, were to do
everything that could be done to make New York a cheap and
pleasant place to live in? The result would be that New York
being so much more desirable a place to live in, more people
would desire to live in it, and the land owners could charge
so much the more for the privilege. All these benefactions
would increase rent.

And so, whatever be the character of the improvement, its
benefit, land being monopolized, must ultimately go to the
owners of land. Were labor-saving invention carried so far
that the necessity of labor in the production of wealth were
done away with, the result would be this: the owners of land
could command all the wealth that could be produced, and
need not share with labor even what is necessary for its
maintenance. Were the powers and capacities of land
increased, the gain would be that of landowners. Or were the
improvement to take place in the powers and capacities of
labor, it would still be the owners of land, not laborers,
who would reap the advantage.

For land being indispensable to labor, those who monopolize
land are able to make their own terms with labor; or rather,
the competition with each other of those who cannot employ
themselves, yet must find employment or starve, will force
wages down to the lowest point at which the habits of the
labor ing class permit them to live and reproduce. At this
point, in all countries where land is fully monopolized, the
wages of common labor must rest, and toward it all other
wages tend, being only kept up above it by the special
conditions, artificial or otherwise, which give labor in
some occupations higher wages than in others. And so no
improvement even in the power of labor itself---whether it
come from education, from the actual increase of muscular
force, or from the ability to do with less sleep and work
longer hours---could raise the reward of labor above this
point. This we see in countries and in occupations where the
labor of women and children is called in to aid the natural
bread-winner in the support of the family. While as for any
increase in economy and thrift, as soon as it became general
it could only lessen, not increase, the reward of labor.

This is the "iron law of wages," as it is styled by the
Germans---the law which determines wages to the minimum on
which laborers will consent to live and reproduce. It is
recognized by all economists, though by most of them
attributed to other causes than the true one. It is
manifestly an inevitable result of making the land from
which all must live the exclusive property of some. The lord
of the soil is necessarily lord of the men who live upon it.
They are as truly and as fully his slaves as though his
ownership in their flesh and blood acknowledged. Their
competition with each other to obtain from him the means of
livelihood must compel them to give up to him all their
earnings save the necessary wages of slavery---to wit,
enough to keep them in working condition and maintain their
numbers. And as no possible increase in the power of his
labor, or reduction in his expenses of living, can benefit
the slave, neither can it, where land is monopolized,
benefit those who have nothing but their labor. It can only
increase the value of land---the proportion of the produce
that goes to the landowner. And this being the case, the
greater employment of machinery, the greater division of
labor, the greater contrasts in the distribution of wealth,
become to the working masses positive evils---making their
lot harder and more hopeless as material progress goes on.
Even education adds but to the capacity for suffering. If
the slave must continue to be a slave, it is cruelty to
educate him.

All this we may not yet fully realize, because the
industrial revolution which began with the introduction of
steam, is as yet in its first stages, while up to this time
the overrunning of a new continent has reduced social
pressure, not merely here, but even in Europe. But the new
continent is rapidly being fenced in, and the industrial
revolution goes on faster and faster.

# Slavery and Slavery

I must leave it to the reader to carry on in other
directions, if he choose, such inquiries as those to which
the last three chapters have been devoted.The more carefully
he examines, the more fully will he see that at the root of
every social problem lies a social wrong, that "ignorance,
neglect or contempt of human rights are the causes of public
misfortunes and corruptions of government." Yet, in truth,
no elaborate examination is necessary. To understand why
material progress does not benefit the masses requires but a
recognition of the self-evident truth that man cannot live
without land; that it is only on land and from land that
human labor can produce.

Robinson Crusoe, as we all know, took Friday as his slave.
Suppose, however, that instead of taking Friday as his
slave, Robinson Crusoe had welcomed him as a man and a
brother; had read him a Declaration of Independence, an
Emancipation Proclamation and a Fifteenth Amendment, and
informed him that he was a free and independent citizen,
entitled to vote and hold office; but had at the same time
also informed him that that particular island was his
(Robinson Crusoe's) private and exclusive property. What
would have been the difference? Since Friday could not fly
up into the air nor swim off through the sea, since if he
lived at all he must live on the island, he would have been
in one case as much a slave as in the other. Crusoe's
ownership of the island would be equivalent of his ownership
of Friday.

Chattel slavery is, in fact, merely the rude and primitive
mode of property in man. It only grows up where population
is sparse; it never, save by virtue of special
circumstances, continues where the pressure of population
gives land a high value, for in that case the ownership of
land gives all the power that comes from the ownership of
men in more convenient form. When in the course of history
we see the conquerors making chattel slaves of the
conquered, it is always where population is sparse and land
of little value, or where they want to carry off their human
spoil. In other cases, the conquerors merely appropriate the
lands of the conquered, by which means they just as
effectually, and much more conveniently, compel the
conquered to work for them. It was not until the great
estates of the rich patricians began to depopulate Italy
that the importation of slaves began. In Turkey and Egypt,
where chattel slavery is yet legal, it is confined to the
inmates and attendants of harems. English ships carried
negro slaves to America, and not to England or Ireland,
because in America land was cheap and labor was valuable,
while in western Europe land was valuable and labor was
cheap. As soon as the possibility of expansion over new land
ceased, chattel slavery would have died out in our Southern
states. As it is. Southern planters do not regret the
abolition of slavery. They get out of the freedmen as
tenants as much as they got out of them as slaves. While as
for praedial slavery---the attachment of serfs to the
soil---the form of chattel slavery which existed longest in
Europe, it is only of use to the proprietor where there is
little competition for land. Neither praedial slavery nor
absolute chattel slavery could have added to the Irish
landlord's virtual ownership of men---to his power to make
them work for him without return. Their own competition for
the means of livelihood insured him all they possibly could
give. To the English proprietor the ownership of slaves
would be only a burden and a loss, when lie can get laborers
for less than it would cost to maintain them as slaves, and
when they are become ill or infirm can turn them on the
parish. Or what would the New England manufacturer gain by
the enslavement of his operatives? The competition with each
other of so-called freemen, who are denied all right to the
soil of what is called *their* country, brings him labor
cheaper and more conveniently than would chattel slavery.

That a people can be enslaved just as effectually by making
property of their lands as by making property of their
bodies, is a truth that conquerors in all ages have
recognized, and that, as society developed, the strong and
unscrupulous who desired to live off the labor of others,
have been prompt to see. The coarser form of slavery, in
which each particular slave is the property of a particular
owner, is only fitted for a rude state of society, and with
social development entails more and more care, trouble and
expense upon the owner. But by making property of the land
instead of the person, much care, supervision and expense
are saved the proprietors; and though no particular slave is
owned by a particular master, yet the one class still
appropriates the labor of the other class as before.

That each particular slave should be owned by a particular
master would in fact become, as social development went on,
and industrial organization grew complex, a manifest
disadvantage to the masters. They would be at the trouble of
whipping, or otherwise compelling the slaves to work; at the
cost of watching them, and of keeping them when ill or
unproductive; at the trouble of finding work for them to do,
or of hiring them out, as at different seasons or at
different times, the number of slaves which different owners
or different contractors could advantageously employ would
vary. As social development went on, these inconveniences
might, were there no other way of obviating them, have led
slave-owners to adopt some such device for the joint
ownership and management of slaves, as the mutual
convenience of capitalists has led to in the management of
capital. In a rude state of society, the man who wants to
have money ready for use must hoard it, or, if he travels,
carry it with him. The man who has capital must use it
himself or lend it. But mutual convenience has, as society
developed, suggested methods of saving this trouble. The man
who wishes to have his money accessible turns it over to a
bank, which does not agree to keep or hand him back that
particular money, but money to that amount. And so by
turning over his capital to savings banks or trust
companies, or by buying the stock or bonds of corporations,
he gets rid of all trouble of handling and employing it. Had
chattel slavery continued, some similar device for the
ownership and management of slaves would in time have been
adopted. But by changing the form of slavery---by freeing
men and appropriating land---all the advantages of chattel
slavery can be secured without any of the disadvantages
which in a complex society attend the owning of a particular
man by a particular master.

Unable to employ themselves, the nominally free laborers are
forced by their competition with each other to pay as rent
all their earnings above a bare living, or to sell their
labor for wages which give but a bare living, and as
landowners the ex-slaveholders are enabled as before, to
appropriate to themselves the labor or the produce of the
labor of their former chattels, having in the value which
this power of appropriating the proceeds of labor gives to
the ownership of land, a capitalized value equivalent, or
more than equivalent, to the value of their slaves. They no
longer have to drive their slaves to work; want and the fear
of want do that more effectually than the lash. They no
longer have the trouble of looking out for their employment
or hiring out their labor, or the expense of keeping them
when they cannot work. That is thrown upon the slaves. The
tribute that they still wring from labor seems like
voluntary payment. In fact, they take it as their honest
share of the rewards of production---since they furnish the
land! And they find so-called political economists, to say
nothing of so-called preachers of Christianity, to tell them
it is so.

We of the United States take credit for having abolished
slavery. Passing the question of how much credit the
majority of us are entitled to for the abolition of negro
slavery, it remains true that we have only abolished one
form of slavery---and that a primitive form which had been
abolished in the greater portion of the country by social
development, and that, notwithstanding its race character
gave it peculiar tenacity, would in time have been abolished
in the same way in other parts of the country. We have not
really abolished slavery; we have retained it in its most
insidious and widespread form---in a form which applies to
whites as to blacks. So far from having abolished slavery,
it is extending and intensifying, and we make no scruple of
selling into it our own children---the citizens of the
republic yet to be. For what else are we doing in selling
the land on which future citizens must live, if they are to
live at all?

The essence of slavery is the robbery of labor. It consists
in compelling men to work, yet taking from them all the
produce of their labor except what suffices for a bare
living. Of how many of our "free and equal American
citizens" is that already the lot? And of how many more is
it coming to be the lot?

In all our cities there are, even in good times, thousands
and thousands of men who would gladly go to work for wages
that would give them merely board and clothes---that is to
say, who would gladly accept the wages of slaves. As I have
previously stated, the Massachusetts Bureau of Labor
Statistics and the Illinois Bui-eau ot Labor Statistics both
declare that in the majority of cases the earnings of wage
workers will not maintain their families, and must be pieced
out by the earnings of women and children. In our richest
states are to be found men reduced to a virtual
peonage---living in their employers' houses, trading at
their stores, and for the most part unable to get out of
their debt from one year's end to the other. In New York,
shirts are made for 35 cents a dozen, and women working from
fourteen to sixteen hours a day average three dollars or
four dollars a week. There are cities where the prices of
such work are lower still. As a matter of dollars and cents,
no master could afford to work slaves so hard and keep them
so cheaply.

But it may be said that the analogy between our industrial
system and chattel slavery is only supported by the
consideration of extremes. Between those who get but a bare
living and those who can live luxuriously on the earnings of
others, are many gradations, and here lies the great middle
class. Between all classes, moreover, a constant movement of
individuals is going on. The millionaire's grand children
may be tramps, while even the poor man who has lost hope for
himself may cherish it for his son. Moreover, it is not true
that all the difference between what labor fairly earns and
what labor really gets goes to the owners of land. And with
us, in the United States, a great many of the owners of land
are small owners---men who own the homesteads in which they
live or the soil which they till, and who combine the
characters of laborer and landowner.

These objections will be best met by endeavoring to imagine
a well developed society, like our own, in which chattel
slavery exists without distinction of race. To do this
requires some imagination, for we know of no such case.
Chattel slavery had died out in Europe before modem
civilization began, and in the Xew World has existed only as
race slavery, and in communities of low industrial
development.

But if we do imagine slavery without race distinction in a
progressive community, we shall see that society, even if
starting from a point where the greater part of the people
were made the chattel slaves of the rest could not long
consist of but the two classes, masters and slaves. The
indolence, interest and necessity of the masters would soon
develop a class of intermediaries between the completely
enslaved and themselves. To supervise the labor of the
slaves, and to keep them in subjection, it would be
necessary to take, from the ranks of the slaves, overseers,
policemen, etc., and to reward them by more of the produce
of slave labor than goes to the ordinary slave. So, too,
would it be necessary to draw out special skill and talent
And in the course of social development a class of traders
would necessarily arise, who, exchanging the products of
slave labor, would retain a considerable portion; and a
class of contractors, who, hiring slave labor from the
masters, would also retain a portion of its produce. Thus,
between the slaves forced to work for a bare living and the
masters who lived without work, intermediaries of various
grades would be developed, some of whom would doubtless
acquire large wealth.

And in the mutations of fortune, some slaveholders would be
constantly falling into the class of intermediaries, and
finally into the class of slaves, while individual slaves
would be rising. The conscience, benevolence or gratitude of
masters would lead them occasionally to manumit slaves;
their interest would lead them to reward the diligence,
inventiveness, fidelity to themselves, or treachery to their
fellows, of particular slaves. Thus, as has often occurred
in slave countries, we would find slaves who were free to
make what they could on condition of paying so much to their
masters every month or every quarter; slaves who had
partially bought their freedom, for a day or two days or
three days in the week, or for certain months in the year,
and those who had completely bought themselves, or had been
presented with their freedom. And, as has always happened
where slavery had not race character, some of these
ex-slaves or their children would, in the constant movement,
be always working their way to the highest places, so that
in such a state of society the apologists of things as they
are would triumphantly point to these examples, saying, "See
how beautiful a thing is slavery! Any slave can become a
slaveholder himself if he is only faithful, industrious and
prudent! It is only their own ignorance and dissipation and
laziness that prevent all slaves from becoming masters!" And
then they would indulge in a moan for human nature. "Alas!"
they would say, "the fault is not in slavery; it is in human
nature"--meaning, of course, other human nature than their
own. And if anyone hinted at the abolition of slavery, they
would charge him with assailing the sacred rights of
property, and of endeavoring to rob poor blind widow women
of the slaves that were their sole dependence; call him a
crank and a communist; an enemy of man and a defier of God!

Consider, furthermore, the operation of taxation in an
advanced society based on chattel slavery; the effect of the
establishment of monopolies of manufacture, trade and
transportation; of the creation of public debts, etc., and
you will see that in reality the social phenomena would be
essentially the same if men were made property as they are
under the system that makes land property.

It must be remembered, however, that the slavery that
results from the appropriation of land does not come
suddenly, but insidiously and progressively. Where
population is sparse and land of little value, the
institution of private property in land may exist without
its effects being much felt. As it becomes more and more
difficult to get laud, so will the virtual enslavement of
the laboring classes go on. As the value of land rises, more
and more of the earnings of labor will be demanded for the
use of land, until finally nothing is left to laborers but
the wages of slavery---a bare living.

But the degree as well as the manner in which individuals
are affected by this movement must vary very much. Where the
ownership of land has been much diffused, there will remain,
for some time after the mere laborer has been reduced to the
wages of slavery, a greater body of smaller landowners
occupying an intermediate position, and who, according to
the land they hold, and the relation which it bears to their
labor, may, to make a comparison with chattel slavery, be
compared, in their gradations, to the owners of a few
slaves; to those who own no slaves but are themselves free;
or to partial slaves, compelled to render service for one,
two, three, four or five days in the week, but for the rest
of the time their own masters. As land becomes more and more
valuable this class will gradually pass into the ranks of
the completely enslaved. The independent American farmer
working with his own hands on his own land is doomed as
certainly as two thousand years ago his prototype of Italy
was doomed. He must disappear, with the development of the
private ownership of land, as the English yeoman has already
disappeared.

We have abolished negro slavery in the United States. But
how small is the real benefit to the slave. George M.
Jackson writes me from St. Louis, under date of August 15,
1883:

> During the war I served in a Kentucky regiment in the
> Federal army. When the war broke out, my father owned
> sixty slaves. I had not been back to my old Kentucky home
> for years until a short time ago, when I was met by one of
> my father's old negroes, who said to me: "Mas George, you
> say you sot us free; but 'fore God, I'm wus off than when
> I belonged to your father." The planters, on the other
> hand, are contented with the change. They say: "How
> foolish it was in us to go to war for slavery. We get
> labor cheaper now than when we owned the slaves." How do
> they get it cheaper? Why, in the shape of rents they take
> more of the labor of the negro than they could under
> slavery, for then they were compelled to return him
> sufficient food, clothing and medical attendance to keep
> him well, and were compelled by conscience and public
> opinion, as well as by law, to keep him when he could no
> longer work. Now their interest and responsibility ceases
> when they have got all the work out of him they can.

In one of his novels, Capt. Marryat tells of a schoolmaster
who announced that he had abandoned the use of the rod. When
tender mothers, tempted by this announcement, brought their
boys to his institution, he was eloquent in his
denunciations of the barbarism of the rod; but no sooner had
the doors closed upon them than the luckless pupils found
that the master had only abandoned the use of the rod for
the use of the cane! Very much like this is our abolition of
negro slavery.

The only one of our prominent men who had any glimmering of
what was really necessary to the abolition of slavery was
Thaddeus Stephens, but it was only a glimmering. "Forty
acres and a mule" would have been a measure of scant justice
to the freedmen, and it would for awhile have given them
something of that personal independence which is necessary
to freedom. Yet only for awhile. In the course of time, and
as the pressure of population increased, the forty acres
would, with the majority of them, have been mortgaged and
the mule sold, and they would soon have been, as now,
competitors for a foothold upon the earth and for the means
of making a living from it. Such a measure would have given
the freedmen a fairer start, and for many of them would have
postponed the evil day; but that is all. Land being private
property, that evil day *must* come.

I do not deny that the blacks of the South have in some
things gained by the abolition of chattel slavery. I will
not even insist that, on the whole, their material condition
has not been improved. But it must be remembered that the
South is yet but sparsely settled, and is behindhand in
industrial development. The continued existence of slavery
there was partly the effect and partly the cause of this. As
population increases, as industry is developed, the
condition of the freedmen must become harder and harder. As
yet, land is comparatively cheap in the South, and there is
much not only unused but unclaimed. The consequence is, that
the freedmen are not yet driven into that fierce competition
which must come with denser population; there is no seeming
surplus of labor seeking employment on any terms, as in the
North. The freedmen merely get a living, as in the days of
slavery, and in many cases not so good a living; but still
there is little or no difficulty in getting that. To fairly
compare the new estate of the freedmen with the old, we must
wait until in population and industrial development the
South begins to approach the condition of the North.

But not even in the North (nor, foi that matter, even in
Europe) has that form of slavery which necessarily results
from the disinheritance of labor by the monopolization of
land, yet reached its culmination. For the vast area of
unoccupied land on this continent has prevented the full
effects ot modern development from being felt. As it becomes
more and more difficult to obtain land, so will the virtual
enslavement of the laboring classes go on. As the value of
land rises, more and more of the earnings of labor will be
demanded for the use of land---that is to say, laborers must
give a greater and greater portion of their time up to the
service of the landlord, until, finally, no matter how hard
they work, nothing is loft them but a bare living.

Of the two systems of slavery, I think there can be no doubt
that upon the same moral level, that which makes property of
persons is more humane than that which results from making
private property of land. The cruelties which are
perpetrated under the system of chattel slavery are more
striking and arouse more indignation because they are the
conscious acts of individuals. But for the suffering of the
poor under the more refined system no one in particular
seems responsible. That one human being should be
deliberately burned by other human beings excites our
imagination and arouses our indignation much more than the
great fire or railroad accident in which a hundred people
are roasted alive. But this very fact permits cruelties that
would not be tolerated under the one system to pass almost
unnoticed under the other. Human beings are overworked, are
starved, are robbed of all the light and sweetness of life,
are condemned to ignorance and brutishness, and to the
infection of physical and moral disease; are driven to crime
and suicide, not by other individuals, but by iron
necessities for which it seems that no one in particular is
responsible.

To match from the annals of chattel slavery the horrors that
day after day transpire unnoticed in the heart of Christian
civilization it would be necessary to go back to ancient
slavery, to the chronicles of Spanish conquest in the New
World, or to stories of the Middle Passage.

That chattel slavery is not the worst form of slavery we
know from the fact that in countries where it has prevailed
irrespective of race distinctions, the ranks of chattel
slaves have been recruited from the ranks of the free poor,
who, driven by distress, have sold themselves or their
children. And I think no one who reads our daily papers can
doubt that even already, in the United States, there are
many who, did chattel slavery; without race distinction,
exist among us, would gladly sell themselves or their
children, and who would really make a good exchange for
their nominal freedom in doing so.

We have not abolished slavery. We never can abolish slavery,
until we honestly accept the fundamental truth asserted by
the Declaration of Independence and secure to all the equal
and unalienable rights with which they are endowed by their
Creator. If we can not or will not do that, then, as a
matter of humanity and social stability, it might be well,
would it avail, to consider whether it were not wise to
amend our constitution and permit poor whites and blacks
alike to sell themselves and their children to good masters.
If we must have slavery, it were better in the form in which
the slave knows his owner, and the heart and conscience and
pride of that owner can be appealed to. Better breed
children for the slaves of good, Christian, civilized people
than breed them for the brothel or the penitentiary. But
alas! that recourse is denied. Supposing we did legalize
chattel slavery again, who would buy men when men can be
hired so cheaply?

# Public Debts and Indirect Taxation

The more we examine, the more clearly may we see that public
misfortunes and corruptions of government *do* spring from
neglect or contempt of the natural rights of man.

That, in spite of the progress of civilization, Europe is
to-day a vast camp, and the energies of the most advanced
portion of mankind are everywhere taxed so heavily to pay
for preparations for war or the costs of war, is due to two
great inventions, that of indirect taxation and that of
public debt.

Both of these devices by which tyrannies are maintained,
governments are corrupted, and the common people plundered,
spring historically from the monopolization of land, and
both directly ignore the natural rights of man. Under the
feudal system the greater part of public expenses were
defrayed from the rent of land, and the landholders had to
do the fighting or bear its cost. Had this system been
continued, England, for instance, would to-day have had no
public debt. And it is safe to say that her people and the
world would have been saved those unnecessary and cruel wars
in which in modern times English blood and treasure has been
wasted. But by the institution of indirect taxes and public
debts the great landholders were enabled to throw oif on the
people at large the burdens which constituted the condition
on which they held their lands, and to throw them off in
such a way that those on whom they rested, though they might
feel the pressure, could not tell from whence it came. Thus
it was that the holding of land was insidiously changed from
a trust into an individual possession, and the masses
stripped of the first and most important of the rights of
man.

The institution of public debts, like the institution of
private property in land, rests upon the preposterous
assumption that one generation may bind another generation.
If a man were to come to me and say, "Here is a promissory
note which your great-grandfather gave to my
great-grandfather, and which you will oblige me by paying,"
I would laugh at him, and tell him that if he wanted to
collect his note he had better hunt up the man who made it;
that I had nothing to do with my great-grandfather's
promises. And if he were to insist upon payment, and to call
my attention to the terms of the bond in which my
great-grandfather expressly stipulated with his great
grandfather that I should pay him, I would only laugh the
more, and be the more certain that he was a lunatic. To such
a demand any one of us would reply in effect, "My
great-grandfather was evidently a knave or a joker, and your
great-grandfather was certainly a fool, which quality you
surely have inherited if you expect me to pay you money
because my great-grandfather promised that I should do so.
He might as well have given your great-grandfather a draft
upon Adam or a check upon the First National Bank of the
Moon."

Yet upon this assumption that ascendants may bind
descendants, that one generation may legislate for another
generation, rests the assumed validity of our land titles
and public debts.

If it were possible for the present to borrow of the future,
for those now living to draw upon wealth to be created by
those who are yet to come, there could be no more dangerous
power, none more certain to be abused; and none that would
involve in its exercise a more flagrant contempt for the
natural and unalienable rights of man. But we have no such
power, and there is no possible invention by which we can
obtain it. When we talk about calling upon future
generations to bear their part in the costs and burdens of
the present, about imposing upon them a share in
expenditures we take the liberty of assuming they will
consider to have been made for their benefit as well as for
ours, we are carrying metaphor into absurdity. Public debts
are not a device for borrowing from the future, for
compelling those yet to be to bear a share in expenses which
a present generation may choose to incur. That is, of
course, a physical impossibility. They are merely a device
for obtaining control of wealth in the present by promising
that a certain distribution of wealth in the future shall be
made---a device by which the owners of existing wealth are
induced to give it up under promise, not merely that other
people shall be taxed to pay them, but that other people's
children shall be taxed for the benefit of their children or
the children of their assigns. Those who get control of
governments are thus enabled to get sums which they could
not get by immediate taxation without arousing the
indignation and resistance of those who could make the most
effective resistance. Thus tyrants are enabled to maintain
themselves, and extravagance and corruption are fostered. If
any cases can be pointed to in which the power to incur
public debts has been in any way a benefit, they are as
nothing compared with the cases in which the effects have
been purely injurious.

The public debts for which most can be said are those
contracted for the purpose of making public improvements,
yet what extravagance and corruption the power of
contracting such debts has engendered in the United States
is too well known to require illustration, and has led, in a
number of the States, to constitutional restrictions. Even
the quasi public debts of railroad and other such
corporations have similarly led to extravagance and
corruption that have far outweighed any good results
accomplished through them. While as for the great national
debts of the world, incurred as they have been for purposes
of tyranny and war, it is impossible to see in them anything
but evil. Of all these great national debts that of the
United States will best bear examination; but it is no
exception. As I have before said, the wealth expended in
carrying on the war did not come from abroad or from the
future, but from the existing wealth in the States under the
national flag, and if, when we called on men to die for
their country, we had not shrunk from taking, if necessary,
nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand dollars from every
millionaire, we need not have created any debt. But instead
of that, what taxation we did impose was so levied as to
fall on the poor more heavily than on the rich, and to
incidentally establish monopolies by which the rich could
profit at the expense of the poor. And then, when more
wealth still was needed, instead of taking it from those who
had it, we told the rich that if they would voluntarily let
the nation use some of their wealth we would make it
profitable to them by guaranteeing the use of the taxing
power to pay them back, principal and interest. And we did
make it profitable with a vengeance. ISTot only did we, by
the institution of the National Banking system, give them
back nine-tenths of much of the money thus borrowed while
continuing to pay interest on the whole amount, but even
where it was required neither by the letter of the bond nor
the equity of the circumstances we made debt incurred in
depreciated greenbacks payable on its face in gold. The
consequence of this method of carrying on the war was to
make the rich richer instead of poorer. The era of monstrous
fortunes in the United States dates from the war.

But if this can be said of the debt of the United States,
what shall be said of other national debts!

In paying interest upon their enormous national debt, what
is it that the people of England are paying? They are paying
interest upon sums thrown or given away by profligate
tyrants, and corrupt oligarchies in generations past---upon
grants made to courtesans, and panders, and sycophants, and
traitors to the liberties of their country; upon sums
borrowed to corrupt their own legislatures and wage wars
both against their own liberties and the liberties of other
peoples. For the Hessians hired and the Indians armed and
the fleets and armies sent to crush the American colonies
into submission, with the effect of splitting into two what
might but for that have perhaps yet been one great
confederated nation; for the cost of treading down the Irish
people and inflicting wounds that yet rankle; for the
enormous sums spent in the endeavor to maintain on the
continent of Europe the blasphemy of divine right; for
expenditures made to carry rapine among unoffending peoples
in the four quarters of the globe, Englishmen of to-day are
taxed. It is not the case of asking a man to pay a debt
contracted by his great-grandfather; it is asking him to pay
for the rope with which his great-grandfather was hanged or
the faggots with which he was burned.

The so-called Egyptian debt which the power of England has
recently been used to enforce is a still more flagrant
instance of spoliation. The late Khedive was no more than an
Arab robber, living at free quarters in the country and
plundering its people. All he could get by stripping them to
starvation and nakedness not satisfying his insensate and
barbarian profligacy, European money-lenders, relying upon
the assumed sanctity of national debts, offered him money on
the most usurious terms. The money was spent with the
wildest recklessness, upon harems, palaces, yachts,
diamonds, presents and entertainments; yet to extort
interest upon it from poverty-stricken fellahs, Christian
England sends fleets and armies to murder and burn, and with
her power maintains the tyranny and luxury of a khedival
puppet at the expense of the Egyptian people.

Thus the device of public debts enables tyrants to entrench
themselves, and adventurers who seize upon government to
defy the people. It permits the making of great and wasteful
expenditures, by silencing, and even converting into
support, the opposition of those who would otherwise resist
these expenditures with most energy and force. But for the
ability of rulers to contract public debts, nine-tenths of
the wars of Christendom for the past two centuries could
never have been waged. The destruction of wealth and the
shedding of blood, the agony of wives and mothers and
children thus caused, cannot be computed, but to these items
must be added the waste and loss and demoralization caused
by constant preparation for war.

Nor do the public misfortunes and corruptions of government
which arise from the ignorance and contempt of human rights
involved in the recognition of public debts, end with the
costs of war and war-like preparation, and the corruptions
which such vast public expenditures foster. The passions
aroused by war, the national hatreds, the worship of
military glory, the thirst for victory or revenge, dull
public conscience, pervert the best social instincts into
that low, unreasoning extension of selfishness miscalled
patriotism; deaden the love of liberty; lead men to submit
to tyranny and usurpation from the savage thirst for cutting
the throats of other people, or the fear of having their own
throats cut. They so pervert religious perceptions that
professed followers of Christ bless in his name the
standards of murder and rapine, and thanks are given to the
Prince of Peace for victories that pile the earth with
mangled corpses, and make hearth-stones desolate!

Nor yet does the evil end here. William H. Vanderbilt, with
his forty millions of registered bonds, declares that the
national debt ought not to be paid off; that, on the
contrary, it ought to be increased, because it gives
stability to the government, "every man who gets a bond
becoming a loyal and loving citizen."Mr. Vanderbilt
expresses the universal feeling of his kind. It was not
loyal and loving citizens with bonds in their pockets who
rushed to the front in our civil war, or who rush to the
front in any war, but the possession of a bond does tend to
make a man loyal and loving to whoever may grasp the
machinery of government, and will continue to cash coupons.
A great public debt creates a great moneyed interest that
wants "strong government" and fears change, and thus forms a
powerful element on which corrupt and tyrannous government
can always rely as against the people. We may see already in
the United States the demoralization of this influence;
while in Europe, where it has had more striking
manifestations, it is the mainstay of tyranny, and the
strongest obstacle to political reform.

Thomas Jefferson was right, when as a deduction from "the
self evident truth that the land belongs in usufruct to the
living," he declared that one generation should not hold
itself bound by the laws or the debts of its predecessors,
and as this widest-minded of American patriots and greatest
of American statesmen said, measures which would give
practical effect to this principle will appear the more
salutary the more they are considered.

Indirect taxation, the other device by which the people are
bled without feeling it, and those who could make the most
effective resistance to extravagance and corruption are
bribed into acquiescence, is an invention whereby taxes are
so levied that those who directly pay are enabled to collect
them again from others, and generally to collect them with a
profit, in higher prices. Those who directly pay the taxes
and, still more important, those who desire high prices, are
thus interested in the imposition and maintenance of
taxation, while those on whom the burden ultimately falls do
not realize it.

The corrupting effects of indirect taxation are obvious
wherever it has been resorted to, but nowhere more obvious
than in the United States. Ever since the war the great
effort of our national government has not been to reduce
taxation, but to find excuses for maintaining war taxation.
The most corrupting extravagance in every department of
administration has thus been fostered, and every endeavor
used to increase expense. We have deliberately substituted a
costly currency for a cheap currency; we have deliberately
added to the cost of paying off the public debt; we maintain
a costly navy for which we have no sort of use, and which,
in case of war, would be of no sort of use to us; and an
army twelve times as large and fifteen times as expensive as
we need. "We are digging silver out of certain holes in the
ground in Nevada and Colorado and poking it down other holes
in the ground in Washington, New York and San Francisco. We
are spending great sums in useless"public improvements," and
are paying pensions under a law which seems framed but to
put a premium upon fraud and get away with public money. And
yet the great question before Congress is what to do with
the surplus. Any proposition to reduce taxation arouses the
most bitter opposition from those who profit or who imagine
they profit from the imposition of this taxation, and a
clamorous lobby surrounds Congress, begging, bullying,
bribing, log-rolling *against* the reduction of taxation,
each interest protesting and insisting that whatever tax is
reduced, its own pet tax must be left intact. This clamor of
special interests for the continuance of indirect taxation
may give us some idea of how much greater are the sums these
taxes take from the people than those they put in the
treasury. But it is only a faint idea, for besides what goes
to the government and what is intercepted by private
interests, there is the loss and waste caused by the
artificial restrictions and difficulties which this system
of indirect taxation places in the way of production and
exchange, and which unquestionably amount to far more than
the other two items.

The cost of this system that can be measured in money is,
however, of little moment as compared with its effect in
corrupting government, in debasing public morals and
befogging the thought of the people. The first thing every
man is called upon to do when he reaches this "land of
liberty" is to take a false oath; the next thing he is
called upon to do is to bribe a Custom House officer. And so
on, through every artery of the body politic and every fiber
of the public mind, runs the poisonous virus. Law is brought
into contempt by the making of actions that are not crimes
in morals crimes in law; the unscrupulous are given an
advantage over the scrupulous; voters are bought, officials
are corrupted, the press is debauched; and the persistent
advocacy of these selfish interests has so far beclouded
popular thought that a very large number---I am inclined to
think a very large majority---of the American people
actually believe that they are benefited by being thus
taxed!

To recount in detail the public misfortunes and corruptions
of government which arise from this vicious system of
taxation would take more space than I can here devote to the
subject. But what I wish specially to point out is, that,
like the evils arising from public debts, they are in the
last analysis due to "ignorance, neglect or contempt of
human rights." While every citizen may properly be called
upon to bear his fair share in all proper expenses of
government, it is manifestly an infringement of natural
rights to use the taxing power so as to give one citizen an
advantage over another, to take from some the proceeds of
their labor in order to swell the profit of others, and to
punish as crimes actions which in themselves are not
injurious.

# The Functions of Government

To prevent government from becoming corrupt and tyrannous,
its organization and methods should be as simple as
possible, its functions be restricted to those necessary to
the common welfare, and in all its parts it should be kept
as close to the people and as directly within their control
as may be.

We have ignored these principles in many ways, and the
result has been corruption and demoralization, the loss of
control by the people, and the wresting of government to the
advantage of the few and the spoliation of the many. The
line of reform, on one side at least, lies in
simplification.

The first and main purpose of government is admirably stated
in that grand document which we Americans so honor and so
ignore---the Declaration of Independence. It is to secure to
men those equal and unalienable rights with which the
Creator has endowed them. I shall hereafter show how the
adoption of the only means by which, in civilized and
progressive society, the first of these unalienable
rights---the equal right to land---can be secured, will at
the same time greatly simplify government and do away with
corrupting influences. And beyond tins, much simplification
is possible, and should be sought wherever it can be
attained. As political corruption makes it easier to resist
the demand for reform, whatever may be done to purify
politics and bring government within the intelligent
supervision and control of the people is not merely in
itself an end to be sought, but a means to larger ends.

The American Republic has no more need for its burlesque of
a navy than a peaceable giant would have for a stuffed club
or a tin sword. It is only maintained for the sake of the
officers and the naval rings. In peace it is a source of
expense and corruption; in war it would be useless. We. are
too strong for any foreign power to wantonly attack, we
ought to be too great to wantonly attack others. If war
should ever be forced upon us, we could safely rely upon
science and invention, which are already superseding navies
faster than they can be built.

So with our army. All we need, if we even now need that, is
a small force of frontier police, such as is maintained in
Australia and Canada. Standing navies and standing armies
are inimical to the genius of democracy, and it ought to be
our pride, as it is our duty, to show the world that a great
republic can dispense with both. And in organization, as in
principle, both our navy and our army are repugnant to the
democratic idea. In both we maintain that distinction
between commissioned officers and common soldiers and
sailors which arose in Europe when the nobility who
furnished the one were considered a superior race to the
serfs and peasants who supplied the other. The whole system
is an insult to democracy, and ought to be swept away.

Our diplomatic system, too, is servilely copied from the
usages of kings who plotted with each other against the
liberties of the people, before the ocean steamship and the
telegraph were invented. It serves no purpose save to reward
unscrupulous politicians and corruptionists, and
occasionally to demoralize a poet. To abolish it would save
expense, corruption and national dignity.

In legal administration there is a large field for radical
reform. Here, too, we have servilely copied English
precedents, and have allowed lawyers to make law in the
interests of their class until justice is a costly gamble
for which a poor man cannot afford to sue. The best use that
could be made of our great law libraries, to which the
reports of thirty-eight States, of the Federal courts, and
of the English, Scotch and Irish courts are each year being
added, would be to send them to the paper mills, and to
adopt such principles and methods of procedure as would
reduce our great army of lawyers at least to the French
standard. At the same time our statute books are full of
enactments which could, with advantage, be swept away. It is
not the business of government to make men virtuous or
religious, or to preserve the fool from the consequences of
his own folly. Government should be repressive no further
than is necessary to secure liberty by protecting the equal
rights of each from aggression on the part of others, and
the moment governmental prohibitions extend beyond this line
they are in danger of defeating the very ends they are
intended to serve. For while the tendency of laws which
prohibit or command what the moral sense does not, is to
bring law into contempt and produce hypocrisy and evasion,
so the attempt to bring law to the aid of morals as to those
acts and relations which do not plainly involve violation of
the liberty of others, is to weaken rather than to
strengthen moral influences; to make the standard of wrong
and right a legal one, and to enable him who can dexterously
escape the punishment of the law to escape all punishment.
Thus, for instance, there can be no doubt that the standard
of commercial honesty would be much higher in the absence of
laws for the collection of debts. As to ali such matters,
the cunning rogue keeps within the law or evades the law,
while the existence of a legal standard lowers the moral
standard and weakens the sanction of public opinions.

Restrictions, prohibitions, interferences with the liberty
of action in itself harmless, are evil in their nature, and,
though they may sometimes be necessary, may for the most
part be likened to medicines which suppress or modify some
symptom without lessening the disease; and, generally, where
restrictive or prohibitive laws are called for, the evils
they are designed to meet may be traced to previous
restriction---to some curtailment of natural rights.

All the tendencies of the time are to the absorption of
smaller communities, to the enlargement of the area within
which uniformity of law and administration is necessary or
desirable. But for this very reason we ought with the more
tenacity to hold, wherever possible, to the principle of
local self-government---the principle that, in things which
concern only themselves, the people of each political
subdivision---township, ward, city or state, as may
be---shall act for themselves. We have neglected this
principle within our States even more than in the relations
between the State and National Governments, and in
attempting to govern great cities by State commissions, and
in making what properly belongs to County Supervisors and
Township Trustees the business of legislatures, we have
divided responsibility and promoted corruption.

Much, too, may be done to restrict the abuse of party
machinery, and make the ballot the true ex pression of the
will of the voter, by simplifying our elective methods. And
a principle should always be kept in mind which we have
largely ignored, that the people cannot manage details, nor
intelligently choose more than a few officials. To call upon
the average citizen to vote at each election for a long
string of candidates, as to the majority of whom he can know
nothing unless he makes a business of politics, is to
relegate choice to nominating conventions and political
rings. And to divide power is often to destroy
responsibility, and to provoke, not to prevent, usurpation.

I can but briefly allude to these matters, though in
themselves they deserve much attention. It is the more
necessary to simplify government as much as possible and to
improve, as much as may be, what may be called the mechanics
of government, because, with the progress of society, the
functions which government must assume steadily increase. It
is only in the infancy of society that the functions of
government can be properly confined to providing for the
common defense and protecting the weak against the physical
power of the strong. As society develops in obedience to
that law of integration and increasing complexity of which I
spoke in the first of these chapters, it becomes necessary
in order to secure equality that other regulations should be
made and enforced, and upon the primary and restrictive
functions of government are superimposed what may be called
cooperative functions, the refusal to assume which leads, in
many cases, to the disregard of individual rights as surely
as does the assumption of directive and restrictive
functions not properly belonging to government.

In the division of labor and the specialization of vocation
that begin in an early stage of social development, and
increase with it, the assumption by individuals of certain
parts in the business of society necessarily operates to the
exclusion of other individuals. Thus when one opens a store
or an inn, or establishes a regular carriage of passengers
or goods, or devotes himself to a special trade or
profession of which all may have need, his doing of these
things operates to prevent others from doing them, and leads
to the establishment of habits and customs which make resort
to him a necessity to others, and which would put those who
were denied this resort at a great disadvantage as compared
with other individuals. Thus to secure equality it becomes
necessary to so limit liberty of action as to oblige those
who thus take upon themselves quasi-public functions to
serve without discrimination those who may apply to them
upon customary conditions. This principle is recognized by
all nations that have made any progress in civilization, in
their laws relating to common carriers, innkeepers, etc.

As civilization progresses and industrial development goes
on, the concentration which results from the utilization of
larger powers and improved processes operates more and more
to the restriction and exclusion of competition, and to the
establishment of complete monopolies. This we may see very
clearly in the railroad. It is but a sheer waste of capital
and labor to build one railroad alongside of another; and
even where this is done, an irresistible tendency leads
either to consolidation or to combination; and even at what
are called competing points, competition is only
transitional. The consolidation of companies, which in a few
years bids fair to concentrate the whole railway business of
the United States in the hands of a half-a-dozen
managements, the pooling of receipts, and agreements as to
business and charges, which even at competing points prevent
competition, are due to a tendency inherent in the
development of the railroad system, and of which it is idle
to complain.

The primary purpose and end of government being to secure
the natural rights and equal liberty of each, all businesses
that involve monopoly are within the necessary province of
governmental regulation, and businesses that are in their
nature complete monopolies become properly functions of the
State. As society develops, the State must assume these
functions, in their nature cooperative, in order to secure
the equal rights and liberty of all. That is to say, as, in
the process of integration, the individual becomes more and
more dependent upon and subordinate to the all, it becomes
necessary for government, which is properly that social
organ by which alone the whole body of individuals can act,
to take upon itself, in the interest of all, certain
functions which cannot safely be left to individuals. Thus
out of the principle that it is the proper end and purpose
of government to secure the natural rights and equal liberty
of the individual, grows the principle that it is the
business of government to do for the mass of individuals
those things which cannot be done, or cannot be so well
done, by individual action. As in the development of
species, the power of conscious, coordinated action of the
whole being must assume greater and greater relative
importance to the automatic action of parts, so is it in the
development of society. This is the truth in socialism,
which, although it is being forced upon us by industrial
progress and social development, we are so slow to
recognize.

In the physical organism, weakness and disease result alike
from the overstraining of functions and from the non-use of
functions. In like manner governments may be corrupted and
public misfortunes induced by the failure to assume, as
governmental, functions that properly belong to government
as the controlling organ in the management of common
interests, as well as from interferences by government in
the proper sphere of individual action. This we may see in
our own case. In what we attempt to do by government and
what we leave undone we are like a man who should leave the
provision of his dinner to the promptings of his stomach
while attempting to govern his digestion by the action of
his will; or like one who, in walking through a crowded
street or over a bad road, should concentrate all his
conscious faculties upon the movement of his legs without
paying any attention to where he was going.

To illustrate: It is not the business of government to
interfere with the views which any one may hold of the
Creator or with the worship he may choose to pay him, so
long as the exercise of these individual rights does not
conflict with the equal liberty of others; and the result of
governmental interference in this domain has been hypocrisy,
corruption, persecution and religious war. It is not the
business of government to direct the employment of labor and
capital, and to foster certain industries at the expense of
other industries; and the attempt to do so leads to all the
waste, loss and corruption due to protective tariffs.

On the other hand, it is the business of government to issue
money. This is perceived as soon as the great labor-saving
invention of money supplants barter. To leave it to every
one who chose to do so to issue money would be to entail
general inconvenience and loss, to offer many temptations to
roguery, and to put the poorer classes of society at a great
disadvantage. These obvious considerations have everywhere,
as society became well organized, led to the recognition of
the coinage of money as an exclusive function of government.
When, in the progress of society, a further labor-saving
improvement becomes possible by the substitution of paper
for the precious metals as the material for money, the
reasons why the issuance of this money should be made a
government function become still stronger. The evils
entailed by wildcat banking in the United States are too
well remembered to need reference. The loss and
inconvenience, the swindling and corruption that flowed from
the assumption by each State of the Union of the power to
license banks of issue ended with the war, and no one would
now go back to them. Yet instead of doing what every public
consideration impels us to, and assuming wholly and fully as
the exclusive function of the General Government the power
to issue paper money, the private interests of bankers have,
up to this, compelled us to the use of a hybrid currency, of
which a large part, though guaranteed by the General
Government, is issued and made profitable to corporations.
The legitimate business of banking---the safe keeping and
loaning of money, and the making and exchange of credits, is
properly left to individuals and associations; but by
leaving to them, even in part and under restrictions and
guarantees, the issuance of money, the people of the United
States suffer an annual loss of millions of dollars, and
sensibly increase the influences which exert a corrupting
effect upon their government.

The principle evident here may be seen in even stronger
light in another department of social life.

The great "railroad question," with its dangers and
perplexities, is a most striking instance of the evil
consequences which result from the failure of the State to
assume functions that properly belong to it.

In rude stages of social development, and where government,
neglectful of its proper functions, has been occupied in
making needless wars and imposing harmful restrictions, the
making and improvement of highways has been left to
individuals, who, to recompense themselves, have been
permitted to exact tolls. It has, however, from the first,
been recognized that these tolls are properly subject to
governmental control and regulation. But the great
inconveniences of this system, and the heavy taxes which, in
spite of attempted regulation, are under it levied upon
production, have led, as social advance went on, to the
assumption of the making and maintenance of highroads as a
governmental duty. In the course of social development came
the invention of the railroad, which merged the business of
making and maintaining roads with the business of carrying
freight and passengers upon them. It is probably due to this
that it was not at first recognized that the same reasons
which render it necessary for the State to make and maintain
common roads apply with even greater force to the building
and operating of railroads. In Great Britain and the United
States, and, with partial exceptions, in other countries,
railroads have been left to private enterprise to build and
private greed to manage. In the United States, where
railroads are of more importance than in any other country
in the world, our only recognition of their public character
has been in the donation of lands and the granting of
subsidies, which have been the cause of much corruption, and
in some feeble attempts to regulate fares and freights.

But the fact that the railroad system as far as yet
developed (and perhaps necessarily) combines transportation
with the maintenance of roadways, renders competition all
the more impossible, and brings it still more clearly within
the province of the State. That it makes the assumption of
the railroad business by the State a most serious matter is
not to be denied. Even if it were possible, which may well
be doubted, as has been sometimes proposed, to have the
roadway maintained by the State, leaving the furnishing of
trains to private enterprise, it would be still a most
serious matter. But look at it which way we may, it is so
serious a matter that it must be faced. As the individual
grows from childhood to maturity, he must meet difficulties
and accept responsibilities from which he well might shrink.
So is it with society. New powers bring new duties and new
responsibilities. Imprudence in going forward involves
danger, but it is fatal to stand still. And however great be
the difficulties involved in the assumption of the railroad
business by the State, much greater difficulties are
involved in the refusal to assume it.

It is not necessary to go into any elaborate argument to
show that the ownership and management of railroads is a
function of the State. That is proved beyond dispute by the
logic of events and of existing facts. Nothing is more
obvious---at least in the United States, where the
tendencies of modern development may be seen much more
clearly than in Europe---than that a union of railroading
with the other functions of government is inevitable. We may
not like it, but we cannot avoid it. Either government must
manage the railroads, or the railroads must manage the
government. There is no escape. To refuse one horn of the
dilemma is to be impaled on the other.

As for any satisfactory State regulation of railroads, the
experience of our States shows it to be impossible. A
strong-willed despot, clothed with arbitrary power, might
curb such leviathans; but popular governments cannot. The
power of the whole people is, of course, greater than the
power of the railroads, but it cannot be exerted steadily
and in details. Even a small special interest is, by reason
of its intelligence, compactness and flexibility, more than
a match for large and vague general interests; it has the
advantage which belongs to a well-armed and disciplined
force in dealing with a mob. But in the number of its
employees, the amount of its revenues, and the extent of the
interests which it controls, the railroad power is gigantic.
And, growing faster than the growth of the country, it is
tending still faster to concentration. It may be that the
man is already born who will control the whole railroad
system of the United States, as Vanderbilt, Gould and
Huntingdon now control great sections of it.

Practical politicians all over the United States recognize
the utter hopelessness of contending with the railroad
power. In many if not in most of the States, no prudent man
will run for office if he believes the railroad power is
against him. Yet in the direct appeal to the people a power
of this kind is weakest, and railroad kings rule States
where, on any issues that came fairly before the people,
they would be voted down. It is by throwing their weight
into primaries, and managing conventions, by controlling the
press, manipulating legislatures, and filling the bench with
their creatures, that the railroads best exert political
power. The people of California, for instance, have voted
against the railroad time and again, or rather imagined they
did, and even adopted a very bad new constitution because
they supposed the railroad was against it. The result is,
that the great railroad company, of whose domain California,
with an area greater than twice that of Great Britain, is
but one of the provinces, absolutely dominates the State.
The men who really fought it are taken into its service or
crushed, and powers are exerted in the interests of the
corporation managers which no government would dare attempt.
This company, heavily subsidized, in the first place, as a
great public convenience, levies on commerce, not tolls, but
tariffs. If a man goes into business requiring
transportation he must exhibit his profits and take it into
partnership for the lion's share. Importers are bound by an
"iron-clad agreement" to give its agents access to their
books, and if they do anything the company deems against its
interests they are fined or ruined by being placed at a
disadvantage to their rivals in business. Three continental
railroads, heavily subsidized by the nation under the
impression that the competition would keep down rates, have
now reached the Pacific. Instead of competing they have
pooled their receipts. The line of steamers from San
Francisco to New York via the Isthmus receives \$100,000 a
month to keep up fares and freights to a level with those
exacted by the railroad, and if you would send goods from
Kew York to San Francisco by way of the Isthmus, the
cheapest way is to first ship them to England. Shippers to
interior points are charged as much as though their goods
were carried to the end of the road and then shipped back
again; and even, by means of the agreements mentioned, an
embargo is laid upon ocean commerce by sailing vessels,
wherever it might interfere with the monopoly.

I speak of California only as an instance. The power of the
railroads is apparent in State after State, as it is in the
National Government. Nothing can be clearer than that, if
present conditions must continue, the American people might
as well content themselves to surrender political power to
these great corporations and their affiliated interests.
There is no escape from this. The railroad managers cannot
keep out of politics, even if they wished to. The
difficulties of the railroad question do not arise from the
fact that peculiarly bad men have got control of the
railroads; they arise from the nature of the railroad
business and its intimate relations to other interests and
industries.

But it will be said, "If the railroads are even now a
corrupting element in our politics, what would they be if
the government were to own and to attempt to i-un them? Is
not governmental management notoriously corrupt and
inefficient? Would not the effect of adding such a vast army
to the already great number of government employees, of
increasing so enormously the revenues and expenditures of
government, be to enable those who got control of government
to defy opposition and perpetuate their power indefinitely;
and would it not be, finally, to sink the whole political
organization in a hopeless slough of corruption?"

My reply is, that great as these dangers may be, they must
be faced, lest worse befall us. When a gale sets him on a
lee shore, the seaman must make sail, even at the risk of
having his canvas fly from the bolt-ropes and his masts go
by the board. The dangers of wind and sea urge him to make
everything snug as may be, alow and aloft; to get rid of
anything that might diminish the weatherly qualities of his
ship, and to send his best helmsmen to the wheel,---not to
supinely accept the certain destruction of the rocks.

Instead of belittling the dangers of adding to the functions
of government as it is at present, what I am endeavoring to
point out is the urgent necessity of simplifying and
improving government, that it may safely assume the
additional functions that social development forces upon it.
It is not merely necessary to prevent government from
getting more corrupt and more inefficient, though we can no
more do that by a negative policy than the seaman can lay-to
in a gale without drifting; it is necessary tp make
government much more efficient and much less corrupt. The
dangers that menace us are not accidental. They spring from
a universal law which we cannot escape. That law is the one
I pointed out in the first chapter of this book---that every
advance brings new dangers and requires higher and more
alert intelligence. A s the more highly organized animal
cannot live unless it have a more fully developed brain than
those of lower animal organizations, so the more highly
organized society must perish unless it bring to the
management of social alFairs greater intelligence and higher
moral sense. The great material advances which modern
invention have enabled us to make, necessitate corresponding
social and political advances. Nature knows no "Baby Act."
We must live up to her conditions or not live at all.

My purpose here is to show how important it is that we
simplify government, purify politics and improve social
conditions, as a preliminary to showing how much in all
these directions may be accomplished by one single great
reform. But although I shall be obliged to do so briefly, it
may be worth while, even if briefly, to call attention to
some principles that should not be forgotten in thinking of
the assumption by the State of such functions as the running
of railroads.

In the first place, I think it may be accepted as a
principle proved by experience, that any considerable
interest having necessary relations with government is more
corruptive of government when acting upon government from
without than when assumed by government. Let a ship in
mid-ocean drop her anchor and pay out her cable, and though
she would be relieved of some weight, since part of the
weight of anchor and cable would be supported by the water,
not only would her progress be retarded, but she would
refuse to answer her helm, and become utterly unmanageable.
Yet, assumed as part of the ship, and properly stowed on
board, anchor and cable no longer perceptibly interfere with
her movements.

A standing army is a corrupting influence, and a danger to
popular liberties; but who would maintain that on this
ground it were wiser, if a standing army must be kept, that
it should be enlisted and paid by private parties, and hired
of them by the state? Such an army would be far more
corrupting and far more dangerous than one maintained
directly by the state, and would soon make its leaders
masters of the state.

I do not think the postal department of the government, with
its extensive ramifications and its numerous employees,
begins to be as important a factor in our politics, or
exerts so corrupting an influence, as would a private
corporation carrying on this business, and which would be
constantly tempted or forced into politics to procure
favorable or prevent unfavorable legislation. Where
individual States and the General Government have
substituted public printing-offices for Public Printers, who
themselves furnished material and hired labor, I think the
result has been to lessen, not to increase, corruptive
influences; and speaking generally, I think experience shows
that in all departments of government the system of
contracting for work and supplies has, on the whole, led to
more corruption than the system of direct employment. The
reason I take to be, that there is in one case a much
greater concentration of corruptive interests and power than
in the other.

The inefficiency, extravagance and corruption which we
commonly attribute to governmental management are mostly in
those departments which do not come under the public eye,
and little concern, if they concern at all, public
convenience. Whether the six new steel cruisers which the
persistent lobbying of contractors has induced Congress to
order, are well or illy built the American people will never
know, except as they learn through the newspapers, and the
fact will no more affect their comfort and convenience than
does the fitting of the Sultan's new breeches, or the latest
changes in officers' uniforms which it has pleased the
Secretary of the Navy to order. But let the mails go astray
or the postman fail in his rounds, and there is at once an
outcry. The post-office department is managed with greater
efficiency than any other department of the national
government, because it comes close to the people. To say the
very least, it is managed as efficiently as any private
company could manage such a vast business, and I think, on
the whole, as economically. And the scandals and abuses that
have arisen in it have been, for the most part, as to
out-of-the-way places, and things of which there was little
or no public consciousness. So in England, the telegraph and
parcel-carrying and savings bank businesses are managed by
government more efficiently and economically than before by
private corporations.

Like these businesses---perhaps even more so---the railroad
business comes directly under the notice of the people. It
so immediately concerns the interests, the convenience and
the safety of tha great body, that under public management
it would compel that close and quick attention that secures
efficiency.

It seems to me that in regard to public affairs we too
easily accept the dictum that faithful and efficient work
can only be secured by the hopes of pecuniary profit, or the
fear of pecuniary loss. We get faithful and efficient work
in our colleges and similar institutions without this, not
to speak of the army and navy, or of the postal and
educational departments of government; and be this as it
may, our railroads are really run by men who, from
switch-tender to general superintendent, have no pecuniary
interest in the business other than to get their pay---in
most cases paltry and inefficient---and hold their
positions. Under governmental ownership they would have, at
the very least, all the incentives to faithfulness and
efficiency that they have now, for that governmental
management of railroads must involve the principles of civil
service reform goes without the saying. The most determined
supporter of the spoils system would not care to resign the
safety of limb and life to engineers and brakemen appointed
for political services.

Look, moreover, at the railroad system as it exists now.
That it is not managed in the interests of the public is
clear; but is it managed in the interests of its owners? Is
it managed with that economy, efficiency and intelligence
that are presumed to be the results of private ownership and
control? On the contrary, while the public interests are
utterly disregarded, the interests of the stockholders are
in most cases little better considered. Our railroads are
really managed in the interests of unscrupulous adventurers,
whose purpose is to bull and bear the stock market; by men
who make the interests of the property they manage
subservient to their personal interests in other railroads
or in other businesses; who speculate in lands and
townsites, who give themselves or their friends contracts
for supplies and special rates for transportation, and who
often deliberately wreck the corporation they control and
rob stockholders to the last cent. From one end to the
other, the management of our railroad system, as it now
exists, reeks with jobbery and fraud.

That ordinary roads, bridges, etc., should not be maintained
for profit, either public or private, is an accepted
principle, and the State of New York has recently gone so
far as to abolish all tolls on the Erie canal. Our postal
service we merely aim to make self-sustaining, and no one
would now think of proposing that the rates of postage
should be increased in order to furnish public revenues;
still less would any one think of proposing to abandon the
government postal service, and turn the business over to
individuals or corporations. In the beginning the postal
service was carried on by individuals with a view to
profits. Had that system been continued to the present day,
it is certain that we should not begin to have such
extensive and regular postal facilities as we have now, nor
such cheap rates; and all the objections that are now urged
against the government assumption of the railroad business
would be urged against government carriage of letters. We
never can enjoy the full benefits of the invention of the
railroad until we make the railroads public property,
managed by public servants in the public interests. And thus
will a great cause of the corruption of government, and a
great cause of monstrous fortunes, be destroyed.

All I have said of the railroad applies, of course, to the
telegraph, the telephone, the supplying of 17 cities with
gas, water, heat and electricity,---in short to all
businesses which are in their nature monopolies. I speak of
the railroad only because the magnitude of the business
makes its assumption by the State the most formidable of
such undertakings.

Businesses that are in their nature monopolies are properly
functions of the State. The State must control or assume
them, in self-defense, and for the protection of the equal
rights of citizens. But beyond this, the field in which the
State may operate beneficially as the executive of the great
cooperative association, into which it is the tendency of
true civilization to blend society, will widen with the
improvement of government and the growth of public spirit.

We have already made an important step in this direction in
our public school system. Our public schools are not
maintained for the poor, as are the English board
schools---where, moreover, payment is required from all who
can pay; nor yet is their main motive the protection of the
State against ignorance. These are subsidiary motives. But
the main motive for the maintenance of our public schools
is, that by far the greater part of our people find them the
best and most economical means of educating their children.
American society is, in fact, organized by the operation of
government into cooperative educational associations, and
with such happy results that in no State where the public
school system has obtained would any proposition to abolish
it get respectful consideration. In spite of the corruption
of our politics, our public schools are, on the whole, much
better than private schools; while by their association of
the children of rich and poor, of Jew and Gentile, of
Protestant and Catholic, of Republican and Democrat, they
are of inestimable value in breaking down prejudice and
checking the growth of class feeling. It is likewise to be
remarked as to our public school system, that corruptive
influences seem to spring rather from our not having gone
far enough than from our having gone too far in the
direction of State action. In some of our States the books
used by the children are supplied at public expense, being
considered school property, which the pupil receives on
entering the school or class, and returns when leaving. In
most of them, however, the pupils, unless their parents
cannot afford the outlay, are required to furnish their own
books. Experience has shown the former system to be much the
best, not only because, when books are furnished to all,
there is no temptation of those who can afford to purchase
books to falsely plead indigence, and no humiliation on the
part of those who cannot; but because the number of books
required is much less, and they can be purchased at cheaper
rates. This not only affects a large economy in the
aggregate expenditure, but lessens an important corruptive
influence. For the strife of the great school-book
publishers to get their books adopted in the public schools,
in which most of them make no scruple of resorting to
bribery wherever they can, has done much to degrade the
character of school boards. This corruptive influence can
only be fully done away with by manufacturing school-books
at public expense, as has been in a number of the States
proposed.

The public library system, which, beginning in the
public-spirited city of Boston, is steadily making its way
over the country, and under which both reading and lending
libraries are maintained at public expense for the free use
of the public, is another instance of the successful
extension of the cooperative functions of government. So are
the public parks and recreation grounds which we are
beginning to establish.

Not only is it possible to go much further in the direction
of thus providing, at public expense, for the public health,
education and recreation, and for public encouragement of
science and invention, but if we can simplify and purify
government it will become possible for society in its
various subdivisions to obtain in many other ways, but in
much larger degree, those advantages for its members that
voluntary cooperative societies seek to obtain. Not only
could the most enormous economies thus be obtained, but the
growing tendency to adulteration and dishonesty, as fatal to
morals as to health, would be checked,and at least such an
organization of industry be reached as would very greatly
reduce the appropriative power of aggregated capital, and
prevent those strifes that may be likened to wars. The
natural progress of social development is unmistakably
toward cooperation, or, if the word be preferred, toward
socialism, though I dislike to use a word to which such
various and vague meanings are attached. Civilization is the
art of living together in closer relations. That mankind
should dwell together in unity is the evident intent of the
Divine mind,---of that Will, expressed in the immutable laws
of the physical and moral universe which reward obedience
and punish disobedience. The dangers which menace modern
society are but the reverse of blessings which modern
society may grasp. The concentration that is going on in all
branches of industry is a necessary tendency of our advance
in the material arts. It is not in itself an evil. If in
anything its results are evil, it is simply because of our
bad social adjustments. The construction of this world in
which we find ourselves is such that a thousand men working
together can produce many times more than the same thousand
men working singly. But this does not make it necessary that
the nine hundred and ninety-nine must be the virtual slaves
of the one.

Let me repeat it, though again and again, for it is, it
seems to me, the great lesson which existing social facts
impress upon him who studies them, and that it is
all-important that we should heed. The natural laws which
permit of social advance, require that advance to be
intellectual and moral as well as material. The natural laws
which give us the steamship, the locomotive, the telegraph,
the printing press, and all the thousand inventions by which
our mastery over matter and material conditions is
increased, *require* greater social intelligence and a
higher standard of social morals. Especially do they make
more and more imperative that justice between man and man
which demands the recognition of the equality of natural
rights.

"Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness \[right
or just doing\] and all these things shall be added unto
you." The first step toward a natural and healthy
organization of society is to secure to all men their
natural, equal and inalienable rights in the material
universe. To do this is not to do everything that may be
necessary; but it is to make all else easier. And unless we
do this nothing else will avail.

I have in this chapter touched briefly upon subjects that
for thorough treatment would require much more space. My
purpose has been to show that the simplification and
purification of government is rendered the more necessary,
on account of functions which industrial development is
forcing upon government, and the further functions which it
is becoming more and more evident that it would be
advantageous for government to assume. In succeeding
chapters I propose to show how, by recognizing in
practicable method the equal and inalienable rights of men
to the soil of their country, government may be greatly
simplified, and corrupting influences destroyed. For it is
indeed true, as the French Assembly declared, that public
misfortunes and corruptions of government spring from
ignorance, neglect or contempt of human rights.

Of course in this chapter and elsewhere in speaking of
government, the state, the community, etc., I use these
terms in a general sense, without reference to existing
political divisions. What should properly belong to the
township or ward, what to the county or state, what to the
nation, and what to such federations of nations as it is in
the manifest line of civilization to evolve, is a matter
into which I have not entered. As to the proper organization
of government, and the distribution of powers, there is much
need for thought.

# What We Must Do

At the risk of repetition let me recapitulate:

The main source of the difficulties that menace us is the
growing inequality in the distribution of wealth. To this
all modern inventors seem to contribute, and the movement is
hastened by political corruption, and by special monopolies
established •by abuse of legislative power. But the primary
cause lies evidently in fundamental social adjustments---in
the relations which we have established between labor and
the natural material, and means of labor---between man and
the planet which is his dwelling-place, workshop and
storehouse. As the earth must be the foundation of every
material structure, so institutions which regulate the use
of land constitute the foundation of every social
organization, and must affect the whole character and
development of that organization. In a society where the
equality of natural rights is recognized, it is manifest
that there can be no great disparity in fortunes. None
except the physically incapacitated will be dependent on
others; none will be forced to sell their labor to others.
There will be differences in wealth, for there are
differences among men as to energy, skill, prudence,
foresight and industry; but there can be no very rich class,
and no very poor class; and, as each generation becomes
possessed of equal natural opportunities, whatever
differences in fortune grow up in one generation will not
tend to perpetuate themselves. In such a community, whatever
may be its form, the political organization must be
essentially democratic.

But, in a community where the soil is treated as the
property of but a portion of the people, some of these
people from the very day of their birth must be at a
disadvantage, and some will have an enormous advantage.
Those who have no rights in the land will be forced to sell
their labor to the landholders for what they can get; and,
in fact, cannot 'live without the landlords' permission.
Such a community must inevitably develop a class of masters
and a class of serfs---a class possessing great wealth, and
a class having nothing; and its political organization, no
matter what its form, must become a virtual despotism.

Our fundamental mistake is in treating land as private
property. On this false basis modern civilization everywhere
rests, and hence, as material progress goes on, is
everywhere developing such monstrous inequalities in
condition as must ultimately destroy it. As without land man
cannot exist; as his very physical substance, and all that
he can acquire or make, must be drawn from the land, the
ownership of the land of a country is necessarily the
ownership of the people of that country---involving their
industrial, social and political subjection. Here is the
great reason why the labor-saving inventions, of which our
century has been so strikingly prolific, have signally
failed to improve the condition of laborers. Labor-saving
inventions primarily increase the power of labor, and
should, therefore, increase wages and improve the condition
of the laboring classes. But this only where land is free to
labor; for labor cannot exert itself without land. No
labor-saving inventions can enable us to make something out
of nothing, or in anywise lessen our dependence upon land.
They can merely add to the efficiency of labor in working up
the raw materials drawn from land. Therefore, wherever land
has been subjected to private ownership, the ultimate effect
of labor-saving inventions, and of all improved processes
and discoveries, is to enable landowners to demand, and
labor to pay, more for the use of land. Land becomes more
valuable, but the wages of labor do not increase; on the
contrary, if there is any margin for possible reductions,
they may be absolutely reduced.

This we already see, and that in spite of the fact that a
very important part of the effect of modern invention has
been by the improvement of transportation to open up new
land. What will be the effect of continued improvement in
industrial processes when the land of this continent is all
"fenced in," as in a few more years it will be, we may
imagine if we consider what would have been the effect of
labor-saving inventions upon Europe had no New World been
opened.

But it may be said that, in asserting that where land is
private property the benefit of industrial improvements goes
ultimately to landowners, I ignore facts, and attribute to
one principle more importance than is its due, since it is
clear that a great deal of the increased wealth arising from
modern improvements has not gone to the owners of land, but
to capitalists, manufacturers, speculators, railroad owners,
and the holders of other monopolies than that of land. It
may be pointed out that the richest family in Europe are the
Rothschilds, who are more loan-jobbers and bankers than
landowners; that the richest in America are the Vanderbilts,
and not the Astors; that Jay Gould got his money, not by
securing land, but by bulling and bearing the stock market,
by robbing people with hired lawyers and purchased judges
and corrupted legislatures. I may be asked if I attach no
importance to the jobbery and robbery of the tariff, under
pretense of "protecting American labor"; to the jugglery
with the monetary system, from the wildcat State banks and
national banking system down to the trade-dollar swindle?

In previous chapters I have given answers to all such
objections; but to repeat in concise form, my reply is, that
I do not ignore any of these things, but that they in nowise
invalidate the self-evident principle that land being
private property, the ultimate benefit of all improvements
in production must go to the landowners. To say that if a
man continues to play at "rondo" the table will ultimately
get his money, is not to say that in the meantime he may not
have his pocket picked. Let me illustrate:

Suppose an island, the soil of which is conceded to be the
property of a few of the inhabitants. the rest of the
inhabitants of this island must either hire land of these
landowners, paying rent for it, or sell their labor to them,
receiving wages. As population increases, the competition
between the non-landowners for employment or the means of
employment must increase rent and decrease wages until the
non-landowners get merely a bare living, and the landholders
get all the rest of the produce of the island. Now, suppose
any improvement or invention made which will increase the
efficiency of labor, it is manifest that, as soon as it
becomes general, the competition between the non-landholders
must give to the landholders all the benefit. No matter how
great the improvement be, it can have but this ultimate
result. If the improvements are so great that all the wealth
the island can produce or that the landowners care for can
be obtained with one-half the labor, they can let the other
half of the laborers starve or evict them into the sea; or
if they aro pious people of the conventional sort, who
believe that God Almighty intended these laborers to live,
though he did not provide any land for them to live on, they
may support them as paupers or ship them off to some other
country as the English Government is shipping the "surplus"
Irishmen. But whether they let them die or keep them alive,
they would have no use for them, and, if improvement still
went on, they would have use for less and less of them.

This is the general principle.

But in addition to this population of landowners and their
tenants and laborers, let us suppose there to be on the
island a storekeeper, an inventor, a gambler and a pirate.
To make our supposition conform to modern fashions, we will
suppose a highly respectable gambler---one of the kind who
endows colleges and subscribes to the conversion of the
heathen---and a very gentlemanly pirate, who flies on his
swift cruiser the ensign of a yacht club instead of the old
raw head and bloody bones, but who, even more regularly and
efficiently than the old-fashioned pirate, levies his toll.

Let us suppose the storekeeper, the gambler and the pirate
well established in business and making money. Along comes
the inventor, and says: "I have an invention which will
greatly add to the efficiency of labor and enable you to
greatly increase the produce of this island, so that there
will he very much more to divide among you all; but, as a
condition for telling you of it, I want you to agree that I
shall have a royalty upon its use." This is agreed to, the
invention is adopted, and does greatly increase the
production of wealth. But it does not benefit the laborers.
The competition between them still forces them to pay such
high rent or take such low wages that they are no better off
than before. They stiL. barely live. But the whole benefit
of the invention does not in this case go to the landowners.
The inventor's royalty gives him a great income, while the
storekeeper, the gambler and the pirate all find their
incomes much increased. The incomes of each one of these
four, we may readily suppose, are larger than any single one
of the landowners, and their gains offer the most striking
contrast to the poverty of the laborers, who are bitterly
disappointed at not getting any share of the increased
wealth that followed the improvement. Something they feel is
wrong, and some among them even begin to murmur that the
Creator of the island surely did not make it for the benefit
of only a few of its inhabitants, and that, as the common
creatures of the Creator, they, too, have some rights to the
use of the soil of the island.

Suppose then some one to arise and say: "What is the use of
discussing such abstractions as the land question, that
cannot come into practical politics for many a day, and that
can only excite dissension and general unpleasantness, and
that, moreover, savor of communism, which as you laborers,
who have nothing but your few rags, very well know is a
highly wicked and dangerous thing, meaning the robbery of
widow women and orphans, and being opposed to religion? Let
us be practical. You laborers are poor and can scarcely get
a living, because you are swindled by the storekeeper, taxed
by the inventor, gouged by the gambler and robbed by the
pirate. Landholders and non-landholders, our interests are
in common as against these vampires. Let us unite to stop
their exactions. The storekeeper makes a profit of 10-50% on
all that he sells. Let us form a cooperative society, which
will sell everything at cost and enable laborers to get rich
by saving the storekeeper's profit on all that they use. As
for the inventor, he has been already well enough paid. Let
us stop his royalty, and there will be so much more to
divide between the landowners and the non-landowners. As for
the gambler and the pirate, let us put a summary end to
their proceedings and drive them off the island!"

Let us imagine a roar of applause, and these propositions
carried out. What then? Then the landowners would become so
much the richer. The laborers would gain nothing, unless it
might be in a clearer apprehension of the ultimate cause of
their poverty. For, although by getting rid of the
storekeeper, the laborers might be able to live cheaper, the
competition between them would soon force them to give up
this advantage to the landowners by taking lower wages or
giving higher rents. And so the elimination of the
inventor's royalty, and of the pickings and stealings of the
gambler and pirate, would only make land more valuable and
increase the incomes of the landholders. The saving made by
getting rid of the storekeeper, inventor, gambler and pirate
would accrue to their benefit, as did the increase in
production from the application of the invention.

That all this is true we may see, as I have shown. The
growth of the railroad system has, for instance, resulted in
putting almost the whole transportation business of the
country in the hands of giant monopolies, who, for the most
part, charge "what the traffic will bear," and who
frequently discriminate in the most outrageous way against
localities. The effect where this is done, as is alleged in
the complaints that are made, is to reduce the price of
land. And all this might be remedied, without raising wages
or improving the condition of labor. It would only make land
more valuable---that is to say, in consideration of the
saving effected in transportation, labor would have to pay a
higher premium for land.

So with all monopolies, and their name is legion. If all
monopolies, save the monopoly of land, were abolished; if,
even, by means of cooperative societies, or other devices,
the profits of exchange were saved, and goods passed from
producer to consumer at the minimum of cost; if government
were reformed to the point of absolute purity and economy,
nothing whatever would be done toward equalization in the
distribution of wealth. The competition between laborers,
who, having no rights in the land, cannot work without some
one else's permission, would increase the value of land, and
force wages to the point of bare subsistence.

Let me not be misunderstood. I do not say that in the
recognition of the equal and unalienable right of each human
being to the natural elements from which life must be
supported and wants satisfied, lies the solution of all
social problems. I fully recognize the fact that even after
we do this, much will remain to do. We might recognize the
equal right to land, and yet tyranny and spoliation be
continued. But whatever else we do, so long as we fail to
recognize the equal right to the elements of nature, nothing
will avail to remedy that unnatural inequality in the
distribution of wealth which is fraught with so much evil
and danger. Reform as we may, until we make this fundamental
reform our material progress can but tend to differentiate
our people into the monstrously rich and the frightfully
poor. Whatever be the increase of wealth, the masses will
still be ground toward the point of bare subsistence---we
must still have our great criminal classes, our paupers and
our tramps, men and women driven to degradation and
desperation from inability to make an honest living.

# The First Great Reform

Do what we may, we can accomplish nothing real and lasting
until we secure to all the first of those equal and
unalienable rights with which, as our Declaration of
Independence has it, man is endowed by his Creator---the
equal and unalienable right to the use and benefit of
natural opportunities.

There are people who are always trying to find some mean
between right and wrong---people who, if they were to see a
man about to be unjustly beheaded, might insist that the
proper thing to do would be to chop ofi" his feet. These are
the people who, beginning to recognize the importance of the
land question, propose in Ireland and England such measures
as judicial valuations of rents and peasant proprietary, and
in the United States, the reservation to actual settlers of
what is left of the public lands, and the limitation of
estates.

Nothing whatever can be accomplished by such timid,
illogical measures. If we would cure social disease we must
go to the root.

There is no use in talking of reserving what there may be
left of our public domain to actual settlers. That would be
merely a locking of the stable door after the horse had been
stolen, and even if it were not, would avail nothing.

There is no use in talking about restricting the amount of
land any one man may hold. That, even if it were
practicable, were idle, and would not meet the difficulty.
The ownership of an acre in a city may give more command of
the labor of others than the ownership of a hundred thousand
acres in a sparsely settled district, and it is utterly
impossible by any legal device to prevent the concentration
of property so long as the general causes which irresistibly
tend to the concentration of property remain untouched. So
long as the wages tend to the point of a bare living for the
laborer we cannot stop the tendency of property of all
kinds. to concentration, and this must be the tendency of
wages until equal rights in the soil of their country are
secured to all. We can no more abolish industrial slavery by
limiting the size of estates than we could abolish chattel
slavery by putting a limit on the number of slaves a single
slaveholder might own. In the one case as in the other, so
far as such restrictions could be made operative they would
only increase the difficulties of abolition by enlarging the
class who would resist it.

There is no escape from it. If we would save the republic
before social inequality and political demoralization have
reached the point when no salvation is possible, we must
assert the principle of the Declaration of Independence,
acknowledge the equal and unalienable rights which inhere in
man by endowment of the Creator, and make land common
property.

If there seems anything strange in the idea that all men
have equal and unalienable rights to the use of the earth,
it is merely that habit can blind us to the most obvious
truths. Slavery, polygamy, cannibalism, the flattening of
children's heads, or the squeezing of their feet, seem
perfectly natural to those brought up where such
institutions or customs exist. But, as a matter of fact,
nothing is more repugnant to the natural perceptions of men
than that land should be treated as subject to individual
ownership, like things produced by labor. It is only among
an insignificant fraction of the people who have lived on
the earth that the idea that the earth itself could be made
private property has ever obtained; nor has it ever obtained
save as the result of a long course of usurpation, tyranny
and fraud. This idea reached development among the Romans,
whom it corrupted and destroyed. It took many generations
for it to make its way among our ancestors; and it did not,
in fact, reach full recognition until two centuries ago,
when, in the time of Charles II, the feudal dues were shaken
off by a landholders' parliament. We accepted it as we have
accepted the aristocratic organization of our army and navy,
and many other things, in which we have servilely followed
European custom. Land being plenty and population sparse, we
did not realize what it would mean when in two or three
cities we should have the population of the thirteen
colonies. But it is time that we should begin to think of it
now, when we see ourselves confronted, in spite of our free
political institutions, with all the problems that menace
Europe---when, though our virgin soil is not quite yet
fenced in, we have a "working class," a "criminal class" and
a "pauper class"; when there are already thousands of
so-called *free* citizens of the republic who cannot by the
hardest toil make a living for their families, and when we
are, on the other hand, developing such monstrous fortunes
as the world has not seen since great estates were eating
out the heart of Rome.

What more preposterous than the treatment of land as
individual property. In every essential land differs from
those things which being the product of human labor are
rightfully property. It is the creation of God; they are
produced by man. It is fixed in quantity; they may be
increased inimitably. It exists, though generations come and
go; they in a little while decay and pass again into the
elements. What more preposterous than that one tenant for a
day of this rolling sphere should collect rent for it from
his co-tenants, or sell to them for a price what was here
ages before him and will be here ages after him? What more
preposterous than that we, living in New York city in this
1883, should be working for a lot of landlords who get the
authority to live on our labor from some English king dead
and gone these centuries? What more preposterous than that
we, the present population of the United States, should
presume to grant to our own people or to foreign capitalists
the right to strip of their earnings American citizens of
the next generation? What more utterly preposterous than
these titles to land? Although the whole people of the earth
in one generation were to unite, they could no more sell
title to land against the next generation than they could
sell that generation. It if a self-evident truth, as Thomas
Jefferson said, that the earth belongs in usufruct to the
living.

Nor can any defense of private property in land be made on
the ground of expediency. On the contrary;, look where you
will, and it is evident that the private ownership of land
keeps land out of use; that the speculation it engenders
crowds population where it ought to be more diffused,
diffuses it where it ought to be closer together; compels
those who wish to improve to pay away a large part of their
capital, or mortgage their labor for years before they are
permitted to improve; prevents men from going to work for
themselves who would gladly do so, crowding them into deadly
competition with each other for the wages of employers; and
enormously restricts tha production of wealth while causing
the grossest inequality in its distribution.

No assumption can be more gratuitous than that constantly
made that absolute ownership of land is necessary to the
improvement and proper use of land. What is necessary to the
best use of land is the security of improvements---the
assurance that the labor and capital expended upon it shall
enjoy their reward. This is a very different thing from the
absolute ownership of land. Some of the finest buildings in
New York are erected upon leased ground. Nearly the whole of
London and other English cities, and great parts of
Philadelphia and Baltimore, are so built. All sorts of mines
are opened and operated on leases. In California and Nevada
the most costly mining operations, involving the expenditure
of immense amounts of capital, were undertaken upon no
better security than the mining regulations, which gave no
ownership of the land, but only guaranteed possession as
long as the mines were worked.

If shafts can be sunk and tunnels can be run, and the most
costly machinery can be put up on public land on mere
security of possession, why could not improvements of all
kinds be made on that security? If individuals will use and
improve land belonging to other individuals, why would they
not use and improve land belonging to the whole people? What
is to prevent land owned by Trinity church, by the Sailors'
Snug Harbor, by the Astors or Rheinlanders, or any other
corporate or individual owners, from being as well improved
and used as now, if the ground rents, instead of going to
corporations or individuals, went into the public treasury?

In point of fact, if land were treated as the common
property of the whole people, it would be far more readily
improved than now, for then the improver would get the whole
benefit of his improvements. Under the present system, the
price that must be paid for land operates as a powerful
deterrent to improvement. And when the improver has secured
land either by purchase or by lease, he is taxed upon his
improvements, and heavily taxed in various ways upon all
that he uses. "Were land treated as the property of the
whole people, the ground rent accruing to the community
would suffice for public purposes, and all other taxation
might be dispensed with. The improver could more easily get
land to improve, and would retain for himself the full
benefit of his improvements exempt from taxation.

To secure to all citizens their equal right to the land on
which they live, does not mean, as some of the ignorant seem
to suppose, that every one must be given a farm, and city
land be cut up into little pieces. It would be impossible to
secure the equal rights of all in that way, even if such
division were not in itself impossible. In a small and
primitive community of simple industries and habits, such a
that Moses legislated for, substantial equality may be
secured by allotting to each family an equal share of the
land and making it inalienable. Or, as among our rude
ancestors in western Europe, or in such primitive society as
the village communities of Russia and India, substantial
equality maybe secured by periodical allotment or
cultivation in common. Or in sparse populations, such as the
early New England colonies, substantial equality may be
secured by giving to each family its town lot and its seed
lot, holding the rest of the land as townland or common. But
among a highly civilized and rapidly growing population,
with changing centers, with great cities and minute division
of industry, and a complex system of production and
exchange, such rude devices become ineffective and
impossible.

Must we therefore consent to inequality---must we therefore
consent that some shall monopolize what is the common
heritage of all? Not at all. If two men find a diamond, they
do not march to a lapidary to have it cut in two. If three
sons inherit a ship, they do not proceed to saw her into
three pieces; nor yet do they agree that if this cannot be
done equal division is impossible? Kor yet is there no other
way to secure the rights of the owners of a railroad than by
breaking up track, engines, cars and depots into as many
separate bits as there are stockholders? And so it is not
necessary, in order to secure equal rights to land, to make
an equal division of land. All that it is necessary to do is
to collect the ground rents for the common benefit.

Nor, to take ground rents for the common benefit, is it
necessary that the State should actually take possession of
the land and rent it out from year to year, or from term to
term, as some ignorant people suppose. It can be done in a
much more simple and easy manner by means of the existing
machinery of taxation. All it is necessary to do is to
abolish all other forms of taxation until the weight of
taxation rests upon the value of land irrespective of
improvements, and takes the ground rent for the public
benefit.

In this simple way, without increasing governmental
machinery, but, on the contrary, greatly simplifying it, we
could make land common property. And in doing this we could
abolish all other taxation, and still have a great and
steadily increasing surplus---a growing common fund, in the
benefits of which all might share, and in the management of
which there would be such a direct and general interest as
to afford the strongest guarantees against misappropriation
or waste. Under this system no one could afford to hold land
he was not using, and land not in use would be thrown open
to those who wished to use it, at once relieving the labor
market and giving an enormous stimulus to production and
improvement, while land in use would be paid for according
to its value, irrespective of the improvements the user
might make. On these he would not be taxed. All that his
labor could add to the common wealth, all that his prudence
could save, would be his own, instead of, as now, subjecting
him to fine. Thus would the sacred right of property be
acknowledged by securing to each the reward of his exertion.

Practically, then, the greatest, the most fundamental of all
reforms, the reform which will make all other reforms
easier, and without which no other reform will avail, is to
be reached by concentrating all taxation into a tax upon the
value of land, and making that heavy enough to take as near
as may be the whole ground rent for common purposes.

To those who have never studied the subject, it will seem
ridiculous to propose as the greatest and most far-reaching
of all reforms a mere fiscal change. But whoever has
followed the train of thought through which in preceding
chapters I have endeavored to lead, will see that in this
simple proposition is involved the greatest of social
revolutions---a revolution compared with which that which
destroyed ancient monarchy in France or that which destroyed
chattel slavery in our southern states, were as nothing.

In a book such as this, intended for the casual reader, who
lacks inclination to follow the close reasoning necessary to
show the full relation of this seemingly simple reform to
economic laws, I cannot exhibit its full force, but I may
point to some of the more obvious of its effects.

To appropriate ground rentto public uses by means of
taxation would permit the abolition of all the taxation
which now presses so heavily upon labor and capital. This
would enormously increase the production of wealth by the
removal of restrictions and by adding to the incentives to
production.

It would at the same time enormously increase the production
of wealth by throwing open natural opportunities. It would
utterly destroy land monopoly by making the holding of land
unprofitable to any but the user. There would be no
temptation to any one to hold land in expectation of future
increase in its value when that increase was certain to be
demanded in taxes. No one could afford to hold valuable land
idle when the taxes upon it would be as heavy as they would
be were it put to the fullest use. Thus speculation in land
would be utterly destroyed, and land not in use would become
free to those who wished to use it.

The enormous increase in production which would result from
thus throwing open the natural means and opportunities of
production, while at the same time removing the taxation
which now hampers, restricts and fines production, would
enormously augment the annual fund from which all incomes
are drawn. It would at the same time make the distribution
of wealth much more equal. That great part of this fund
which is now taken by the owners of land, not as a return
for anything by which they add to production, but because
they have appropriated as their own the natural means and
opportunities of production, and which as material progress
goes on, and the value of land rises, is constantly becoming
larger and larger, would be virtually divided among all, by
being utilized for common purposes. The removal of
restrictions upon labor and the opening of natural
opportunities to labor, would make labor free to employ
itself. Labor, the producer of all wealth, could never
become "a drug in the market" while desire for any form of
wealth was unsatisfied. With the natural opportunities of
employment thrown open to all, the spectacle of willing men
seeking vainly for employment could not be witnessed; there
could be no surplus of unemployed labor to beget that
cut-throat competition of laborers for employment which
crowds wages down to the cost of merely living. Instead of
the one-sided competition of workmen to find employment,
employers would compete with each other to obtain workmen.
there would be no need of combinations to raise or maintain
wages; for wages, instead of tending to the lowest point at
which laborers can live, would tend to the highest point
which employers could pay, and thus, instead of getting but
a mere fraction of his earnings, the workman would get the
full return of his labor, leaving to the skill, foresight
and capital of the employer those additional earnings that
are justly their due.

The equalization in the distribution of wealth that would
thus result would effect immense economies and greatly add
to productive power. The cost of the idleness, pauperism and
crime that spring from poverty would be saved to the
community; the increased mobility of labor, the increased
intelligence of the masses, that would result from this
equalized distribution of wealth, the greater incentive to
invention and to the use of improved processes that would
result from the increase in wages, would enormously increase
production.

To abolish all taxes save a tax upon the value of land would
at the same time greatly simplify the machinery and expenses
of government, and greatly reduce government expenses. An
army of customhouse officers, and internal revenue
officials, and license collectors and assessors, clerks,
accountants, spies, detectives, and government employees of
every description, could be dispensed with. The corrupting
effect of indirect taxation would be taken out of our
politics. The rings and combinations now interested in
keeping up taxation would cease to contribute money for the
debauching of voters and to beset the law-making power with
their lobbyists. We should get rid of the fraud and false
swearing, of the bribery and subornation which now attend
the collection of so much of our public revenues. We should
get rid of the demoralization that proceeds from laws which
prohibit actions in themselves harmless, punish men for
crimes which the moral sense does not condemn, and offer a
constant premium to evasion. "Land lies out of doors." It
cannot be hid or carried off. Its value can be ascertained
with greater ease and exactness than the value of anything
else, and taxes upon that value can be collected with
absolute certainty and at the minimum of expense. To rely
upon land values for the whole public revenue would so
simplify government, would so eliminate incentives to
corruption, that we could safely assume as governmental
functions the management of telegraphs and railroads, and
safely apply thQ increasing surplus to securing such common
benefits and providing such public conveniences as advancing
civilization may call for.

And in thinking of what is possible in the way of the
management of common concerns for the common benefit, not
only is the great simplification of government which would
result from the reform I have suggested to be considered,
but the higher moral tone that would be given to social life
by the equalization of conditions and the abolition of
poverty. The greed of wealth, which makes it a business
motto that every man is to be treated as though he were a
rascal, and induces despair of getting in places of public
trust men who will not abuse them for selfish ends, is but
the reflection of the fear of want. Men trample over each
other from the frantic dread of being trampled upon, and the
admiration with which even the unscrupulous money-getter is
regarded springs from habits of thought engendered by the
fierce struggle for existence to which the most of us are
obliged to give up our best energies. But when no one feared
want, when every one felt assured of his ability to make an
easy and independent living for himself and his family, that
popular admiration which now spurs even the rich man still
to add to his wealth would be given to other things than the
getting of money. We should learn to regard the man who
strove to get more than he could use, as a fool---as indeed
he is.

He must have eyes only for the mean and vile, who has mixed
with men without realizing that selfishness and greed and
vice and crime are largely the result of social conditions
which bring out the bad qualities of human nature and stunt
the good; without realizing that there is even now among men
patriotism and virtue enough to secure us the best possible
management of public affairs if our social and political
adjustments enabled us to utilize those qualities. Who has
not known poor men who might safely be trusted with untold
millions? Who has not met with rich men who retained the
most ardent sympathy with their fellows, the warmest
devotion to all that would benefit their kind? Look to-day
at our charities, hopeless of permanent good though they may
be! They at least show the existence ot unselfish
sympathies, capable, if rightly directed, of the largest
results.

It is no mere fiscal reform that I propose; it is a
conforming of the most important social adjustments to
natural laws. To those who have never given thought to the
matter, it may seem irreverently presumptuous to say that it
is the evident intent of the Creator that land values should
be the subject of taxation; that rent should be utilized for
the benefit of the entire community. Yet to whoever does
think of it, to say this will appear no more presumptuous
than to say that the Creator has intended men to walk on
their feet, and not on their hands. Man, in his social
relations, is as much included in the creative scheme as man
in his physical relations. Just as certainly as the fish was
intended to swim in the water, and the bird to fly through
the air, and monkeys to live in trees, and moles to burrow
underground, was man intended to live with his fellows. He
is by nature a social animal. And the creative scheme must
embrace the life and development of society, as truly as it
embraces the life a-nd development of the individual. Our
civilization cannot carry us beyond the domain of law.
Railroads, telegraphs and labor-saving machinery are no more
accidents than are flowers and trees.

Man is driven by his instincts and needs to form society.
Society, thus formed, has certain needs and functions for
which revenue is required. These needs and functions
increase with social development, requiring a larger and
larger revenue. Now, experience and analogy, if not the
instinctive perceptions of the human mind, teach us that
there is a natural way of satisfying every natural want. And
if human society is included in nature, as it surely is,
this must apply to social wants as well as to the wants of
the individual, and there must be a natural or right method
of taxation, as there is a natural or right method of
walking.

We know, beyond peradventure, that the natural or right way
for a man to walk is on his feet, and not on his hands. We
know this of a surety---because the feet are adapted to
walking, while the hands are not; because in walking on the
feet all the other organs of the body are free to perform
their proper functions, while in walking on the hands they
are not; because a man can walk on his feet with ease,
convenience and celerity, while no amount of training will
enable him to walk on his hands save awkwardly, slowly and
painfully. In the same way we may know that the natural or
right way of raising the revenues which are required by the
needs of society is by the taxation of land values. The
value of land is in its nature and relations adapted to
purposes of taxation, just as the feet in their nature and
relations are adapted to the purposes of walking. The value
of land only arises as in the integration of society the
need for some public or common revenue begins to be felt. It
increases as the development of society goes on, and as
larger and larger revenues are therefore required. Taxation
upon land values does not lessen the individual incentive to
production and accumulation, as do other methods of
taxation; on the contrary, it leaves perfect freedom to
productive forces, and prevents restrictions upon production
from arising. It does not foster monopolies, and cause
unjust inequalities in the distribution of wealth, as do
other taxes; on the contrary, it has the effect of breaking
down monopoly and equalizing the distribution of wealth. It
can be collected with greater certainty and economy than any
other tax; it does not beget the evasion, corruption and
dishonesty that flow from other taxes. In short, it conforms
to every economic and moral requirement. What can be more in
accordance with justice than that the value of land, which
is not created by individual effort, but arises from the
existence and growth of society, should be taken by society
for social needs?

In trying, in a previous chapter, to imagine a world in
which natural material and opportunities were free as air, I
said that such a world as we find ourselves in is best for
men who will use the intelligence with which man has been
gifted. So, evidently, it is. The very laws which cause
social injustice to result in inequality, suffering and
degradation are in their nature beneficent. All this evil is
the wrong side of good that might be.

Man is more than an animal. And the more we consider the
constitution of this world in which we find ourselves, the
more clearly we see that its constitution is such as to
develop more than animal life. K the purpose for which this
world existed were merely to enable animal man to eat, drink
and comfortably clothe and house himself for his little day,
some such world as I have previously endeavored to imagine
would be best. But the purpose of this world, so far at
least as man is concerned, is evidently the development of
moral and intellectual, even more than of animal, powders.
Whether we consider man himself or his relations to nature
external to him, the substantial truth of that bold
declaration of the Hebrew scriptures, that man has been
created in the image of God, forces itself upon the mind.

If all the material things needed by man could be produced
equally well at all points on the earth's surface, it might
seem more convenient for man the animal, but how would he
have risen above the animal level? As we see in the history
of social development, commerce has been and is the great
civilizer and educator. The seemingly infinite diversities
in the capacity of different parts of the earth's surface
lead to that exchange of productions which is the most
powerful agent in preventing isolation, in breaking down
prejudice, in increasing knowledge and widening thought.
These diversities of nature, which seemingly increase with
our knowledge of nature's powers, like the diversities in
the aptitudes of individuals and communities, which
similarly increase with social development, call forth
powers and give rise to pleasures which could never arise
had man been placed, like an ox, in a boundless field of
clover. The "international law of God" which we fight with
our tariffs,---so shortsighted are the selfish prejudices of
men---is the law which stimulates mental and moral progress;
the law to which civilization is due.

And so, when we consider the phenomena of rent, it reveals
to us one of those beautiful and beneficent adaptations, in
which more than in anything else the human mind recognizes
evidences of Mind infinitely greater, and catches glimpses
of the Master Workman.

This is the law of rent: As individuals come together in
communities, and society grows, integrating more and more
its individual members, and making general interests and
general conditions of more and more relative importance,
there arises, over and above the value which individuals can
create for themselves, a value which is created by the
community as a whole, and which, attaching to land, becomes
tangible, definite and capable of computation and
appropriation. As society grows, so grows this value, which
springs from and represents in tangible form what society as
a whole contributes to production as distinguished from what
is contributed by individual exertion. By virtue of natural
law in those aspects which it is the purpose of the science
we call political economy to discover, as it is the purpose
of the sciences which we call chemistry and astronomy to
discover other aspects of natural law,---all social advance
necessarily contributes to the increase of this common
value; to the growth of this common fund.

Here is a provision made by natural law for the increasing
needs of social growth; here is an adaptation of nature by
virtue of which the natural progress of society is a
progress toward equality, not toward inequality; a
centripetal force tending to unity, growing out of and ever
balancing a centrifugal force tending to diversity. Here is
a fund belonging to society as a whole from which, without
the degradation of alms, private or public, provision can be
made for the weak, the helpless, the aged; from which
provision can be made for the common wants of all as a
matter of common right to each, and by the utilization of
which society, as it advances, may pass, by natural methods
and easy stages from a rude association for purposes of
defense and police, into a cooperative association, in which
combined power guided by combined intelligence can give to
each more than his own exertions multiplied many fold could
produce.

By making land private property, by permitting individuals
to appropriate this fund which nature plainly intended for
the use of all, we throw the children's bread to the dogs of
Greed and Lust; we produce a primary inequality which gives
rise in every direction to other tendencies to inequality;
and from this perversion of the good gifts of the Creator,
from this ignoring and defying of his social laws, there
arise in the very heart of our civilization those horrible
and monstrous things that betoken social putrefaction.

# The American Farmer

It is frequently asserted that no proposition for the
recognition of common rights to land can become a practical
question in the United States because of the opposition of
the farmers who own their own farms, and who constitute the
great body of our population, wielding when they choose to
exert it a dominating political power.

That new ideas make their way more slowly among an
agricultural population than among the population of cities
and towns is true---though, I think, in less degree true of
the United States than of any other country. But beyond
this, it seems to me that those who look upon the small
farmers of the United States as forming an impregnable
bulwark to private property in land very much miscalculate.

Even admitting, which I do not, that farmers could be relied
upon to oppose measures fraught with great general benefits
if seemingly opposed to their smaller personal interests, it
is not true that such measures as I have suggested are
opposed to the interests of the great body of farmers. On
the contrary, these measures would be as clearly to their
advantage as to the advantage of wage-workers. The average
farmer may at first start at the idea of virtually making
land common property, but given time for discussion and
reflection, and those who are already trying to persuade him
that to put all taxation upon the value of land would be to
put all taxation upon him, have as little chance of success
as the slaveholders had of persuading their negroes that the
Northern armies were bent on kidnapping and selling them in
Cuba. The average farmer can read, write and cypher---and on
matters connected with his own interests cyphers pretty
closely. He is not out of the great currents of thought,
though they may affect him more slowly, and he is anything
but a contented peasant, ignorantly satisfied with things as
they are, and impervious to ideas of change. Already
dissatisfied, he is becoming more so. His hard and barren
life seems harder and more barren as contrasted with the
excitement and luxury of cities, of which he constantly
reads even if he does not frequently see, and the great
fortunes accumulated by men who do nothing to add to the
stock of wealth arouse his sense of injustice. He is at
least beginning to feel that he bears more than his fair
share of the burdens of society, and gets less than his fair
share of its benefits; and though the time for his awakening
has not yet come, his thought, with the decadence of old
political issues, is more and more turning to economic and
social questions.

It is clear that the change in taxation which I propose as
the means whereby equal rights to the soil may be asserted
and maintained, would be to the advantage of farmers who are
working land belonging to others, of those whose farms are
virtually owned by mortgagees, and of those who are seeking
farms. And not only do the farmers whose opposition is
relied upon---those who own their own farms---form, as I
shall hereafter show, but a decreasing minority of the
agricultural vote, and a small and even more rapidly
decreasing minority of the aggregate vote; but the change
would be so manifestly to the advantage of the smaller
farmers who constitute the great body, that when they come
to understand it they will favor instead of opposing it. The
farmer who cultivates his own small farm with his own hands
is a landowner, it is true, but he is in greater degree a
laborer, and in his ownership of stock, improvements, tools,
etc., a capitalist. It is from his labor, aided by this
capital, rather than from any advantage represented by the
value of his land, that he derives his living. His main
interest is that of a producer, not that of a landowner.

There lived in Dublin, some years ago, a gentleman named
Murphy--"Cozy" Murphy, they called him, for short, and
because he was a very comfortable sort of a Murphy. Cozy
Murphy owned land in Tipperary; but as he had an agent in
Tipperary to collect his rents and evict his tenants when
they did not pay, he himself lived in Dublin, as being the
more comfortable place. And he concluded, at length, that
the most comfortable place in Dublin, in fact the most
comfortable place in the whole world, was---in bed. So he
went to bed and stayed there for nearly eight years; not
because he was at all ill, but because he liked it. He ate
his dinners, and drank his wine, and smoked his cigars, and
read, and played cards, and received visitors, and verified
his agent's accounts, and drew checks---all in bed. After
eight years' lying in bed, he grew tired of it, got up,
dressed himself, and for some years went around like other
people, and then died. But his family were just as well off
as though he had never gone to bed---in fact, they were
better off; for while his income was not a whit diminished
by his going to bed, his expenses were.

This was a typical landowner---a landowner pure and simple.
Now let the working farmer consider what would become of
himself and family if he and his boys were to go to bed and
stay there, and he will realize how much his interests as a
laborer exceed his interests as a landowner.

It requires no grasp of abstractions for the working farmer
to see that to abolish all taxation, save upon the value of
land, would be really to his interest, no matter how it
might affect larger landholders. Let the working farmer
consider how the weight of indirect taxation falls upon him
without his having power to shift it off upon any one else;
how it adds to the price of nearly everything he has to buy,
without adding to the price of what he has to sell; how it
compels him to contribute to the support of government in
far greater proportion to what he possesses than it does
those who are much richer, and he will see that by the
substitution of direct for indirect taxation, he would be
largely the gainer. Let him consider further, and he will
see that he would be still more largely the gainer if direct
taxation were confined to the value of land. The land of the
working farmer is improved land, and usually the value of
the improvements and of the stock used in cultivating it
bear a very high proportion to the value of the bare land.
Now, as all valuable land is not improved as is that of the
working farmer, as there is much more of valuable land than
of improved land, to substitute for the taxation now levied
upon improvements and stock, a tax upon the naked value of
land, irrespective of improvements, would be manifestly to
the advantage of the owners of improved land, and especially
of small owners, the value of whose improvements bears a
much greater ratio to the value of their land than is the
case with larger owners; and who, as one of the effects of
treating improvements as a proper subject of taxation, are
taxed far more heavily, even upon the value of their land,
than are larger owners.

The working farmer has only to look about him to realize
this. Near by his farm of eighty or one hundred and sixty
acres he will find tracts of five hundred or a thousand, or,
in some places, tens of thousands of acres, of equally
valuable land, on which the improvements, stock, tools and
household effects are much less in proportion than on his
own small farm, or which may be totally unimproved and
unused. In the villages he will find acre, half-acre and
quarter-acre lots, unimproved or slightly improved, which
are more valuable than his whole farm. If he looks further,
he will see tracts of mineral land, or land with other
superior natural advantages, having immense value, yet on
which the taxable improvements amount to little or nothing;
while, when he looks to the great cities, he will find
vacant lots, twenty-five by one hundred feet, worth more
than a whole section of agricultural land such as his; and
as he goes toward their centers. he will find most
magnificent buildings less valuable than the ground on which
they stand, and block after block where the land would sell
for more per front foot than his whole farm. Manifestly to
put all taxes on the value of land would be to lessen
relatively and absolutely the taxes the working farmer has
to pay.

So far from the effect of placing all taxes upon the value
of land being to the advantage of the towns at the expense
of the agricultural districts, the very reverse of this is
obviously true. The great increase of land values is in the
cities, and with the present tendencies of growth this must
continue to be the case. To place all taxes on the value of
land would be to reduce the taxation of agricultural
districts relatively to the taxation of towns and cities.
And this would be only just; for it is not alone the
presence of their own populations which gives value to the
land of towns and cities, but the presence of the more
scattered agricultural population, for whom they constitute
industrial, commercial and financial centers.

While at first blush it may seem to the farmer that to
abolish all taxes upon other things than the value of land
would be to exempt the richer inhabitants of cities from
taxation, and unduly to tax him, discussion and reflection
will certainly show him that the reverse is the case.
Personal property is not, never has been, and never can be,
fairly taxed. The rich man always escapes more easily than
the man who has but little; the city, more easily than the
country. Taxes which add to prices bear upon the inhabitants
of sparsely settled districts with as much weight, and in
many cases with much more weight, than upon the inhabitants
of great cities. Taxes upon improvements manifestly fall
more heavily upon the working farmer, a great part of the
value of whose farm consists of the value of improvements,
than upon the owners of valuable unimproved land, or upon
those whose land, as that of cities, bears a higher relation
in value to the improvements.

The truth is, that the working farmer would be an immense
gainer by the change. "Where he would have to pay more taxes
on the value of his land, he would be released from the
taxes now levied on his stock and improvements, and from all
the indirect taxes that now weigh so heavily upon him. And
as the effect of taxing unimproved land as heavily as though
it were improved would be to compel mere holders to sell,
and to destroy mere speculative values, the farmer in
sparsely settled districts would have little or no taxes to
pay. It would not be until equally good land all about him
was in use, and he had all the advantages of a well settled
neighborhood, that his taxes would be more than nominal.

What the farmer who owns his own farm would lose would be
the selling value of his land, but its usefulness to him
would be as great as before---greater than before, in fact,
as he would get larger returns from his labor upon it; and
as the selling value of other land would be similarly
affected, this loss would not make it harder for him to get
another farm if lie wished to move, while it would be easier
for him to settle his children or to get more land if he
could advantageously cultivate more. The loss would be
nominal; the gain would be real. It is better for the small
farmer, and especially for the small farmer with a growing
family, that labor should be high than that land should be
high. Paradoxical as it may appear, small landowners do not
profit by the rise in the value of land. On the contrary
they are extinguished. But before speaking of this let me
show how much misapprehension there is in the assumption
that the small independent farmers constitute, and will
continue to constitute, the majority of the American people.

Agriculture is the primitive occupation; the farmer is the
American pioneer; and even in those cases, comparatively
unimportant, where settlement is begun in the search for the
precious metals, it does not become permanent until
agriculture in some of its branches takes root. But as
population increases and industrial development goes on, the
relative importance of agriculture diminishes. That the
non-agricultural population of the United States is steadily
and rapidly gaining on the agricultural population is of
course obvious. According to the census report the urban
population of the United States was in 1Y90 but 3.3% of the
whole population, while in 1880 it had risen to
22.5%.Agriculture is jet the largest occupation, but in the
aggregate other occupations much exceed it. According to the
census, which, unsatisfactory as it is, is yet the only
authority we have, the number of persons engaged in
agriculture in 18S0 was 7,670,493 out of 17,392,099 returned
as engaged in gainful occupations of all kinds. Or, if we
take the number of adult males as a better comparison of
political power, we may find, with a little figuring, that
the returns show 6,491,116 males of sixteen years and over
engaged in agriculture, against 7,422,639 engaged in other
occupations. According to these figures the agricultural
vote is already in a clear minority in the United States,
while the preponderance of the non-agricultural vote,
already great, is steadily and rapidly increasing.

But while the agricultural population of the United States
is thus already in a minority, the men who own their own
farms are already in a minority in the agricultural
population. According to the census the number of farms and
plantations in the United States in 1880 was 4,008,907. The
number of tenant farmers, paying money rents or snare rents,
is given by one of the census bulletins at 1,024,601. This
would leave but 2,984,306 nominal owners of farms, out of
the 7,679,493 persons employed in agriculture. The real
owners of their farms must be greatly less even than this.
The most common form of agricultural tenancy in the United
States is not that of money or share rent, but of mortgage.
What proportion of American farms occupied by their nominal
owners are under mortgage, we can only guess. But there can
be little doubt that the number of mortgaged farms must
largely exceed the number of rented farms, and it may not be
too high an estimate to put the number of mortgaged farms at
one-half the number of unrented ones.However this may be, it
is certain that the farmers who really own their farms are
but a minority of farmers, and a small minority of those
engaged in agriculture.

Further than this, all the tendencies of the time are to the
extinction of the typical American farmer---the man who
cultivates his own acres with his own hands. This movement
has only recently begun, but it is going on, and must go on,
under present conditions, with increasing rapidity. The
remarkable increase in the large farms and diminution in the
small ones, shown by the analysis of the census figures
which will be found in the appendix, is but evidence of the
fact---too notorious to need the proof of figures---that the
tendency to concentration, which in so many other branches
of industry has substituted the factory for self-employing
workmen, has reached agriculture. One invention after
another has already given the large farmer a crushing
advantage over the small farmer, and invention is still
going on.And it is not merely in the making of his crops,
but in their transportation and marketing, and in the
purchase of his supplies, that the large producer in
agriculture gains an advantage over the small one. To talk,
as some do, about the bonanza farms breaking up in a little
while into small homesteads, is as foolish as to talk of the
great shoe factory giving way again to journeymen shoemakers
with their lapstones and awls. The bonanza farm and the
great wire-fenced stock ranch have come to stay while
present conditions last. If they show themselves first on
new land, it is because there is on new land the greatest
freedom of development, but the tendency exists wherever
modern industrial influences are felt, and is showing itself
in the British Isles as well as in our older states.

This tendency means the extirpation of the typical American
farmer, who with his own hands and the aid of his boys
cultivates his own small farm. When a Brooklyn lawyer or
Boston banker can take a run in a palace car out to the new
Northwest, buy some sections of land; contract for having it
broken up, seeded, reaped and threshed; leave on it a
superintendent, and make a profit on his first year's crop
of from six to ten thousand dollars a section, what chance
has the emigrant farmer of the old type who comes toiling
along in the wagon which contains his wife and children, and
the few traps that with his team constitute his entire
capital? When English and American capitalists can run miles
of barbed wire fence, and stock the great enclosure with
large herds of cattle, which can be tended, carried to
market, and sold, at the minimum of expense and maximum of
profit, what chance has the man who would start
stock-raising with a few cows?

From the typical American farmer of the era now beginning to
pass away, two types are differentiating---the capitalist
farmer and the farm-laborer. The former does not work with
his own hands, but with the hands of other men. He passes
but a portion of his time, in some cases hardly any of it,
upon the land he cultivates. His home is in a large town or
great city, and he is, perhaps, a banker and speculator as
well as a farmer. The latter is proletarian, a nomad---part
of the year a laborer and part of the year a tramp,
migrating from farm to farm and from place to place, without
family or home or any of the influences and responsibilities
that develop manly character. If our treatment of land
continues as now, some of our small independent farmers will
tend toward one of these extremes, and many more will tend
toward the other. But besides the tendency to production on
a large scale, which is operating to extirpate the small
independent farmer, there is, in the rise of land values,
another powerful tendency operating in the same direction.

At the looting of the Summer Palace at Pekin by the allied
forces in 1860, some valuable jewels were obtained by
private soldiers. How long did they remain in such
possession? If a Duke of Brunswick were to distribute his
hoard of diamonds among the poor, how long would the poor
continue to hold them? The peasants of Ireland and the
costermongers of London have their donkeys, which are worth
only a few shillings. But if by any combination of
circumstances the donkey became as valuable as a blooded
horse, no peasant or costermonger would be found driving a
donkey. Where chickens are cheap, the common people eat
them; where they are dear, they are to be found only on the
tables of the rich. So it is with land. As it becomes
valuable it must gravitate from the hands of those who work
for a living into the possession of the rich.

What has caused the extreme concentration of land ownership
in England is not so much the conversion of the feudal
tenures into fee simple, the spoliation of the religious
houses and the enclosure of the commons, as this effect of
the rise in the value of land. The small estates, of which
there were many in England two centuries and even a century
ago, have become parts of large estates mainly by purchase.
They gravitated to the possession of the rich, just as
diamonds, or valuable paintings, or fine horses, gravitate
to the possession of the rich.

So long as the masses are fools enough to permit private
property in land, it is rightly esteemed the most secure
possession. It cannot be burned, or destroyed by any
accident; it cannot be carried off; it tends constantly to
increase in value with the growth of population and
improvement in the arts. Its possession being a visible sign
of secure wealth, and putting its owner, as competition
becomes sharp, in the position of a lord or god to the human
creatures who have no legal rights to this planet, carries
with it social consideration and deference. For these
reasons land commands a higher price in proportion to the
income it yields than anything else, and the man to whom
immediate income is of more importance than a secure
investment finds it cheaper to rent land than to buy it.

Thus, as land grew in value in England, the small owners
were not merely tempted or compelled by the vicissitudes of
life to sell their land, but it became more profitable to
them to sell it than to hold it, as they could hire land
cheaper than they could hire capital. By selling and then
renting, the English farmer, thus converted from a landowner
into a tenant, acquired, for a time at least, the use of
more land and more capital, and the ownership of land thus
gravitated from the hands of those whose prime object is to
get a living into the hands of those whoso prime object is a
secure investment.

This process must go on in the United States as land rises
in value. We may observe it now. It is in the newer parts of
our growing cities that we find people of moderate means
living in their own houses. Where land is more valuable, we
find such people living in rented houses. In such cities,
block after block is put up and sold, generally under
mortgage, to families who thus endeavor to secure a home of
their own. But I think it is the general experience, that as
years pass by, and land acquires a greater value, these
houses and lots pass from the nominal ownership of dwellers
into the possession of landlords, and are occupied by
tenants. So, in the agricultural districts, it is where land
has increased little if anything in value that we find
homesteads which have been long in the possession of the
same family of working farmers. A general officer of one of
the great trunk railroad lines told me that his attention
had been called to the supreme importance of the land
question by the great westward emigration of farmers, which,
as the result of extensive inquiries, he found due to the
rise of land values. As land rises in value the working
farmer finds it more and more difficult for his boys to get
farms of their own, while the price for which he can sell
will give him a considerably larger tract of land where land
is cheaper; or he is tempted or forced to mortgage, and the
mortgage eats and eats until it eats him out, or until he
concludes that the wisest thing he can do is to realize the
difference between the mortgage and the selling value of his
farm and emigrate west. And in many cases he commences again
under the load of a mortgage; for as settlement is now
going, very much of the land sold to settlers by railroad
companies and speculators is sold upon mortgage. And what is
the usual result may be inferred from such announcements as
those placarded in the union depot at Council Bluffs,
offering thousands of improved farms for sale on liberal
terms as to payment. One man buys upon mortgage, fails in
his payments, or gets disgusted, and moves on, and the farm
he has improved is sold to another man upon mortgage.
Generally speaking, the ultimate result is, that the
mortgagee, not the mortgagor, becomes the full owner.
Cultivation under mortgage is, in truth, the transitional
form between cultivation by the small owner and cultivation
by the large owner or by tenant.

The fact is, that the typical American farmer, the
cultivator of a small farm of which he is the owner, is the
product of conditions under which labor is dear and land is
cheap. As these conditions change, labor becoming cheap and
land becoming dear, he must pass away as he has passed away
in England.

It has already become impossible in our older states for a
man starting with nothing to become by his labor the owner
of a farm. As the public domain disappears this will become
impossible all over the United States. And as in the
accidents and mutations of life the small owners are shaken
from their holdings, or find it impossible to compete with
the grand culture of capitalistic farming, they will not be
able to recover, and must swell the mass of tenants and
laborers. Thus the concentration of land ownership is
proceeding, and must proceed, if private property in land be
continued. So far from it being to the interest of the
working farmer to defend private property in land, its
continued recognition means that his children, if not
himself, shall lose all right whatever in their native soil;
shall sink from the condition of free men to that of serfs.

# City and Country

Cobbett compared London, even in his day, to a great wen
growing upon the fair face of England. There is truth in
such comparison. Nothing more clearly shows the
unhealthiness of present social tendencies than the steadily
increasing concentration of population in great cities.
There are about 12,000 head of beef cattle killed weekly in
the shambles of Xew York, while, exclusive of what goes
through for export, there are about 2,100 beef carcasses per
week brought in refrigerator cars from Chicago. Consider
what this single item in the food supply of a great city
suggests as to the elements of fertility, which, instead of
being returned to the soil from which they come, are swept
out through the sewers of our great cities. The reverse of
this is the destructive character of our agriculture, which
is year by year decreasing the productiveness of our soil,
and virtually lessening the area of land available for the
support of our increasing millions.

In all the aspects of human life similar effects are being
produced. The vast populations of these great cities are
utterly divorced from all the genial influences of nature.
The great mass of them never, from year's end to year's end,
press foot upon mother earth, or pluck a wild flower, or
hear the tinkle of brooks, the rustle of grain, or the
murmur of leaves as the light breeze comes through the
woods. All the sweet and joyous influences of nature are
shut out from them. Her sounds are drowned by the roar of
the streets and the clatter of the people in the next room,
or the next tenement; her sights, by tall buildings, which
reduce the horizon to one of feet. Sun and moon rise and
set, and in solemn procession the constellations move across
the sky, but these imprisoned multitudes behold them only as
might a man in a deep quarry. The white snow falls in winter
only to become dirty slush on the pavements, and as the sun
sinks'in summer a worse than noonday heat is refracted from
masses of brick and stone. Wisely have the authorities of
Philadelphia labeled with its name every tree in their
squares; for how else shall the children growing up in such
cities know one tree from another? how shall they even know
grass from clover?

This life of great cities is not the natural life of man. He
must, under such conditions, deteriorate, physically,
mentally, morally. Yet the evil does not end here. This is
only one side of it. This unnatural life of the great cities
means an equally unnatural life in the country. Just as the
wen or tumor, drawing the wholesome juices of the body into
its poisonous vortex, impoverishes all other parts of the
frame, so does the crowding of human beings into great
cities impoverish human life in the country.

Man is a gregarious animal. He cannot live by bread alone.
If he suffers in body, mind and soul from being crowded into
too close contact with his fellows, so also does he suffer
from being separated too far from them. The beauty and the
grandeur of nature pall upon man where other men are not to
be met; her infinite diversity becomes monotonous where
there is not human companionship; his physical comforts are
poor and scant, his nobler powers languish; all that makes
him higher than the animal suffers for want of the stimulus
that comes from the contact of man with man. Consider the
barrenness of the isolated farmer's life---the dull round of
work and sleep, in which so much of it passes. Consider,
what is still worse, the monotonous existence to which his
wife is condemned; its lack of recreation and excitement,
and of gratifications of taste, and of the sense of harmony
and beauty; its steady drag of cares and toils that make
women worn and wrinkled when they should be in their bloom.
Even the discomforts and evils of the crowded tenement house
are not worse than the discomforts and evils of such a life.
Yet as the cities grow, unwholesomely crowding people
together till they are packed in tiers, family above family,
so are they unwholesomely separated in the country. The
tendency everywhere that this process of urban concentration
is going on, is to make the life of the country poor and
hard, and to rob it of the social stimulus and social
gratifications that are so necessary to human beings. The
old healthy social life of village and townland is
everywhere disappearing. In England, Scotland and Ireland,
the thinning out of population in the agricultural districts
is as marked as is its concentration in cities and large
towns. In Ireland, as you ride along the roads, your
car-driver, if he be an old man, will point out to you spot
after spot, which, when he was a boy, were the sites of
populous hamlets, echoing in the summer evenings with the
laughter of children and the joyous sports of young people,
but now utterly desolate, showing, as the only evidences of
human occupation, the isolated cabins of miserable herds. In
Scotland, where in such cities as Glasgow, human beings are
so crowded together that two-thirds of the families live in
a single room, where if you go through the streets of a
Saturday night, you will think, if you have ever seen the
Terra del Fuegans, that these poor creatures might envy
them, there are wide tracts once populous, now given up to
cattle, to grouse and to deer---glens that once sent out
their thousand fighting men now tenanted by a couple of
gamekeepers. So across the Tweed, while London, Liverpool,
Leeds, Manchester and Nottingham have grown, the village
life of "merrie England" is all bnt extinct. Two-thirds of
the entire population is crowded into cities. Clustering
hamlets, such as those through which, according to
tradition, Shakespeare and his comrades rollicked, have
disappeared; village greens where stood the may-pole, and
the clothyard arrow flew from the longbow to the bull's eye
of the butt, are plowed under or enclosed by the walls of
some lordly demesne, while here and there stand mementoes
alike of a bygone faith and a departed population, in great
churches or their remains---churches such as that now could
never be filled unless the congregations were brought from
town by railroad excursion trains.

So in the agricultural districts of our older States the
same tendency may be beheld; but it is in the newer States
that its fullest expression is to be found---in ranches
measured by square miles, where half-savage cowboys, whose
social life is confined to the excitement of the "round-up"
or a periodical "drunk" in a railroad town; and in bonanza
farms, where in the spring the eye wearies of seas of waving
grain before resting on a single home---farms where the
cultivators are lodged in barracks, and only the
superintendent" enjoys the luxury of a wife.

That present tendencies are hurrying modern society toward
inevitable catastrophe, is apparent from the constantly
increasing concentration of population in great cities, if
in nothing else. A century ago New York and its suburbs
contained about 25,000 souls; now they contain over
2,000,000. The same growth for another century would put
here a population of 160,000,000. Such a city is impossible.
But what shall we say of the cities of ten and twenty
millions, that, if present tendencies continue, children now
born shall see?

On this, however, I will not dwell. I merely wish to call
attention to the fact that this concentration of population
impoverishes social life at the extremities, as well as
poisons it at the center; that it is as injurious to the
farmer as it is to the inhabitant of the city slum.

This unnatural distribution of population, like that
unnatural distribution of wealth which gives one man
hundreds of millions and makes other men tramps, is the
result of the action of the new industrial forces in social
conditions not adapted to them. It springs primarily from
our treatment of land as private property, and secondarily
from our neglect to assume social functions which material
progress forces upon us. Its causes removed, there would
ensue a natural distribution of population, which would give
every one breathing space and neighborhood.

It is in this that would be the great gain of the farmer in
the measures I have proposed. With the resumption of common
rights to the soil, the overcrowded population of the cities
would spread, the scattered population of the country would
grow denser. When no individual could profit by advance in
the value of land, when no one need fear that his children
could be jostled out of their natural rights, no one would
want more land than he could profitably use. Instead of
scraggy, half cultivated farms, separated by great tracts
lying idle, homesteads would come close to each other.
Emigrants would not toil through unused acres, nor grain be
hauled for thousand of miles past half-tilled land. The use
of machinery would not be abandoned: where culture on a
large scale secured economies it would still go on; but with
the breaking up of monopolies, the rise in wages and the
better distribution of wealth, industry of this kind would
assume the cooperative form. Agriculture would cease to be
destructive, and would become more intense, obtaining more
from the soil and returning what it borrowed. Closer
settlement would give rise to economies of all kinds; labor
would be far more productive, and rural life would partake
of the conveniences, recreations and stimulations now only
to be obtained by the favored classes in large towns. The
monopoly of land broken up, it seems to me that rural life
would tend to revert to the primitive type of the village
surrounded by cultivated fields, with its common pasturage
and woodlands. But however this may be, the working farmer
would participate fully in all the enormous economies and
all the immense gains which society can secure by the
substitution of orderly cooperation for the anarchy of
reckless, greedy scrambling.

That the masses now festering in the tenement houses of our
cities, under conditions which breed disease and death, and
vice and crime, should each family have its healthful home,
set in its garden; that the working farmer should be able to
make a living with a daily average of two or three hours'
work, which more resembled healthy recreation than toil;
that his home should be replete with all the conveniences
yet esteemed luxuries; that it should be supplied with light
and heat, and power if needed, and connected with those of
his neighbors by the telephone; that his family should be
free to libraries, and lectures, and scientific apparatus,
and instruction; that they should be able to visit the
theatre, or concert, or opera, as often as they cared to,
and occasionally to make trips to other parts of the country
or to Europe; that, in short, not merely the successful man,
the one in a thousand, but the man of ordinary parts and
ordinary foresight and prudence, should enjoy all that
advancing civilization can bring to elevate and expand human
life, seems, in the light of existing facts, as wild a dream
as ever entered the brain of hasheesh eater. Yet the powers
already within the grasp of man make it easily possible.

In our mad scramble to get on top of one another, how little
do we take of the good things that bountiful nature offers
us. Consider this fact: To the majority of people in such
countries as England, and even largely in the United States,
fruit is a luxury. Yet mother earth is not niggard of her
fruit. If we chose to have it so, every road might be lined
with fruit trees.

# Conclusion

Here, it seems to me, is the gist and meaning of the great
social problems of our time: More is given to us than to any
people at any time before; and, *therefore*, more is
required of us. We have made, and still are making, enormous
advances on material lines. It is necessary that we
commensurately advance on moral lines. Civilization, as it
progresses, *requires* a higher conscience, a keener sense
of justice, a warmer brotherhood, a wider, loftier, truer
public spirit. Failing these, civilization must pass into
destruction. It cannot be maintained on the ethics of
savagery. For civilization knits men more and more closely
together, and constantly tends to subordinate the individual
to the whole, and to make more and more important social
conditions.

The social and political problems that confront us are
darker than they realize who have not given thought to them;
yet their solution is a mere matter of the proper adjustment
of social forces. Man masters material nature by studying
her laws, and in conditions and powers that seemed most
forbidding, has already found his richest storehouses and
most powerful servants. Although we have but begun to
systematize our knowledge of physical nature, it is evident
she will refuse us no desire if we but seek its
gratification in accordance with her laws.

And that faculty of adapting means to ends which has enabled
man to convert the once impassable ocean into his highway,
to transport himself with a speed which leaves the swallow
behind, to annihilate space in the communication of his
thoughts, to convert the rocks into warmth and light and
power and material for a thousand uses, to weigh the stars
and analyze the sun, to make ice under the equator, and bid
flowers bloom in northern winters, will also, if he will use
it, enable him to overcome social difficulties and avoid
social dangers. The domain of law is not confined to
physical nature. It just as certainly embraces the mental
and moral universe, and social growth and social life have
their laws as fixed as those of matter and of motion. Would
we make social life healthy and happy, we must discover
those laws, and seek our ends in accordance with them.

I ask no one who may read this book to accept my views. I
ask him to think for himself.

Whoever, laying aside prejudice and self-interest, will
honestly and carefully make up his own mind as to the causes
and the cure of the social evils that are so apparent, does,
in that, the most important thing ill his power toward their
removal. This primary obligation devolves upon us
individually, as citizens and as men. Whatever else we may
be able to do, this must come first. For "if the blind lead
the blind, they both shall fall into the ditch."

Social reform is not to be secured by noise and shouting; by
complaints and denunciation; by the formation of parties, or
the making of revolutions; but by the awakening of thought
and the progress of ideas. Until there be correct thought,
there cannot be right action; and when there is correct
thought, right action *will* follow. Power is always in the
hands of the masses of men. What oppresses the masses is
their own ignorance, their own shortsighted selfishness.

The great work of the present for every man, and every
organization of men, who would improve social conditions, is
the work of education---the propagation of ideas. It is only
as it aids this that anything else can avail. And in this
work every one who can think may aid---first by forming
clear ideas himself, and then by endeavoring to arouse the
thought of those with whom he comes in contact.

Many there are, too depressed, too embruted with hard toil
and the struggle for animal existence, to think for
themselves. Therefore the obligation devolves with all the
more force on those who can. If thinking men are few, they
are for that reason all the more powerful. Let no man
imagine that he has no influence. Whoever he may be, and
wherever he may be placed, the man who thinks becomes a
light and a power. That for every idle word men may speak
they shall give an account at the day of judgment, seems a
hard saying. But what more clear than that the theory of the
persistence of force, which teaches us that every movement
continues to act and react, must apply as well to the
universe of mind as to that of matter. Whoever becomes
imbued with a noble idea kindles a flame from which other
torches are lit, and influences those with whom he comes in
contact, be they few or many. How far that influence, thus
perpetuated, may extend, it is not given to him here to see.
But it may be that the Lord of the Vineyard will know.

As I said in the first of these papers, the progress of
civilization necessitates the giving of greater and greater
attention and intelligence to public affairs. And for this
reason I am convinced that we make a great mistake in
depriving one sex of voice in public matters, and that we
could in no way so increase the attention, the intelligence
and the devotion which may be brought to the solution of
social problems as by enfranchising our women. Even if in a
ruder state of society the intelligence of one sex suffices
for the management of common interests, the vastly more
intricate, more delicate and more important questions which
the progress of civilization makes of public moment, require
the intelligence of women as of men, and that we never can
obtain until we interest them in public affairs. And I have
come to believe that very much of the inattention, the
flippancy, the want of conscience, which we see manifested
in regard to public matters of the greatest moment, arises
from the fact that we debar our women from taking their
proper part in these matters, nothing will fully interest
men unless it also interests women. There are those who say
that women are less intelligent than men; but who will say
that they are less influential?

And I am firmly convinced, as I have already said, that to
effect any great social improvement, it is sympathy rather
than self-interest, the sense of duty rather than the desire
for self-advancement, that must be appealed to. Envy is akin
to admiration, and it is the admiration which the rich and
powerful excite which secures the perpetuation of
aristocracies. Where tenpenny Jack looks with contempt upon
ninepenny Joe, the social injustice which makes the masses
of the people hewers of wood and drawers of water for a
privileged few, has the strongest bulwarks. It is told of a
certain Florentine agitator that when he had received a new
pair of boots, he concluded that all popular grievances were
satisfied. How often do we see this story illustrated anew
in working-men's movements and trade-union struggles? This
is the weakness of all movements that appeal only to
self-interest.

And as man is so constituted that it is utterly impossible
for him to attain happiness save by seeking the happiness of
others, so does it seem to be of the nature of things that
individuals and classes can obtain their own just rights
only by struggling for the rights of others. To illustrate:
When workmen in any trade form a trades union, they gain, by
subordinating the individual interests of each to the common
interests of all, the power of making better terms with
employers. But this power goes only a little way when the
combination of the trades union is met and checked by the
pressure for employment of those outside its limits. No
combination of workmen can raise their own wages much above
the level of ordinary wages. The attempt to do so is like
the attempt to bail out a boat without stopping up the
seams. For this reason, it is necessary, if workmen would
accomplish anything real and permanent for themselves, not
merely that each trade should seek the common interests of
all trades, but that skilled workmen should address
themselves to those general measures which will improve the
condition of unskilled workmen. Those who are most to be
considered, those for whose help the struggle must be made,
if labor is to be enfranchised, and social justice won, are
those least able to help or struggle for themselves, those
who have no advantage of property or skill or
intelligence,---the men and women who are at the very bottom
of the social scale. In securing the equal rights of these
we shall secure the equal rights of all.

Hence it is, as Mazzini said, that it is around the standard
of duty rather than around the standard of self-interest
that men must rally to win the rights of man. And herein may
we see the deep philosophy of Him who bid men love their
neighbors as themselves.

In that spirit, and in no other, is the power to solve
social problems and carry civilization onward.
