# Art and Advertisement

I propose, subject to the patience of the reader, to devote
two or three articles to prophecy. Like all healthy-minded
prophets, sacred and profane, I can only prophesy when I am
in a rage and think things look ugly for everybody. And like
all healthy-minded prophets, I prophesy in the hope that my
prophecy may not come true. For the prediction made by the
true soothsayer is like the warning given by a good doctor.
And the doctor has really triumphed when the patient he
condemned to death has revived to life. The threat is
justified at the very moment when it is falsified. Now I
have said again and again (and I shall continue to say again
and again on all the most inappropriate occasions) that we
must hit Capitalism, and hit it hard, for the plain and
definite reason that it is growing stronger. Most of the
excuses which serve the capitalists as masks are, of course,
the excuses of hypocrites. They lie when they claim
philanthropy; they no more feel any particular love of men
than Albu felt an affection for Chinamen. They lie when they
say they have reached their position through their own
organising ability. They generally have to pay men to
organise the mine, exactly as they pay men to go down it.
They often lie about their present wealth, as they generally
lie about their past poverty. But when they say that they
are going in for a "constructive social policy," they do not
lie. They really are going in for a constructive social
policy. And we must go in for an equally destructive social
policy; and destroy, while it is still half-constructed, the
accursed thing which they construct.

## The Example of the Arts

Now I propose to take, one after another, certain aspects
and departments of modern life, and describe what I think
they will be like in this paradise of plutocrats, this
Utopia of gold and brass in which the great story of England
seems so likely to end. I propose to say what I think our
new masters, the mere millionaires, will do with certain
human interests and institutions, such as art, science,
jurisprudence, or religion---unless we strike soon enough to
prevent them. And for the sake of argument I will take in
this article the example of the arts.

Most people have seen a picture called "Bubbles," which is
used for the advertisement of a celebrated soap, a small
cake of which is introduced into the pictorial design. And
anybody with an instinct for design (the caricaturist of the
*Daily Herald*, for instance), will guess that it was not
originally a part of the design. He will see that the cake
of soap destroys the picture as a picture; as much as if the
cake of soap had been used to scrub off the paint. Small as
it is, it breaks and confuses the whole balance of objects
in the composition. I offer no judgment here upon Millais's
action in the matter; in fact, I do not know what it was.
The important point for me at the moment is that the picture
was not painted for the soap, but the soap added to the
picture. And the spirit of the corrupting change which has
separated us from that Victorian epoch can be best seen in
this: that the Victorian atmosphere, with all its faults,
did not permit such a style of patronage to pass as a matter
of course. Michael Angelo may have been proud to have helped
an emperor or a pope; though, indeed, I think he was prouder
than they were on his own account. I do not believe Sir John
Millais was proud of having helped a soap-boiler. I do not
say he thought it wrong; but he was not proud of it. And
that marks precisely the change from his time to our own.
Our merchants have really adopted the style of merchant
princes. They have begun openly to dominate the civilisation
of the State, as the emperors and popes openly dominated in
Italy. In Millais's time, broadly speaking, art was supposed
to mean good art; advertisement was supposed to mean
inferior art. The head of a black man, painted to advertise
somebody's blacking, could be a rough symbol, like an inn
sign. The black man had only to be black enough. An artist
exhibiting the picture of a Negro was expected to know that
a black man is not so black as he is painted. He was
expected to render a thousand tints of grey and brown and
violet: for there is no such thing as a black man just as
there is no such thing as a white man. A fairly clear line
separated advertisement from art.

## The First Effect

I should say the first effect of the triumph of the
capitalist (if we allow him to triumph) will be that that
line of demarcation will entirely disappear. There will be
no art that might not just as well be advertisement. I do
not necessarily mean that there will be no good art; much of
it might be, much of it already is, very good art. You may
put it, if you please, in the form that there has been a
vast improvement in advertisements. Certainly there would be
nothing surprising if the head of a Negro advertising
Somebody's Blacking nowadays were finished with as careful
and subtle colours as one of the old and superstitious
painters would have wasted on the negro king who brought
gifts to Christ. But the improvement of advertisements is
the degradation of artists. It is their degradation for this
clear and vital reason: that the artist will work, not only
to please the rich, but only to increase their riches; which
is a considerable step lower. After all, it was as a human
being that a pope took pleasure in a cartoon of Raphael or a
prince took pleasure in a statuette of Cellini. The prince
paid for the statuette; but he did not expect the statuette
to pay him. It is my impression that no cake of soap can be
found anywhere in the cartoons which the Pope ordered of
Raphael. And no one who knows the small-minded cynicism of
our plutocracy, its secrecy, its gambling spirit, its
contempt of conscience, can doubt that the artist-advertiser
will often be assisting enterprises over which he will have
no moral control, and of which he could feel no moral
approval. He will be working to spread quack medicines,
queer investments; and will work for Marconi instead of
Medici. And to this base ingenuity he will have to bend the
proudest and purest of the virtues of the intellect, the
power to attract his brethren, and the noble duty of praise.
For that picture by Millais is a very allegorical picture.
It is almost a prophecy of what uses are awaiting the beauty
of the child unborn. The praise will be of a kind that may
correctly be called soap; and the enterprises of a kind that
may truly be described as Bubbles.

# Letters and the New Laureates

In these articles I only take two or three examples of the
first and fundamental fact of our time. I mean the fact that
the capitalists of our community are becoming quite openly
the kings of it. In my last (and first) article, I took the
case of Art and advertisement. I pointed out that Art must
be growing worse---merely because advertisement is growing
better. In those days Millais condescended to Pears' soap.
In these days I really think it would be Pears who
condescended to Millais. But here I turn to an art I know
more about, that of journalism. Only in my case the art
verges on artlessness.

The great difficulty with the English lies in the absence of
something one may call democratic imagination. We find it
easy to realise an individual, but very hard to realise that
the great masses consist of individuals. Our system has been
aristocratic: in the special sense of there being only a few
actors on the stage. And the back scene is kept quite dark,
though it is really a throng of faces. Home Rule tended to
be not so much the Irish as the Grand Old Man. The Boer War
tended not to be so much South Africa as simply "Joe." And
it is the amusing but distressing fact that every class of
political leadership, as it comes to the front in its turn,
catches the rays of this isolating lime-light; and becomes a
small aristocracy. Certainly no one has the aristocratic
complaint so badly as the Labour Party. At the recent
Congress, the real difference between Larkin and the English
Labour leaders was not so much in anything right or wrong in
what he said, as in something elemental and even mystical in
the way he suggested a mob. But it must be plain, even to
those who agree with the more official policy, that for Mr.
Havelock Wilson the principal question was Mr. Havelock
Wilson; and that Mr. Sexton was mainly considering the
dignity and fine feelings of Mr. Sexton. You may say they
were as sensitive as aristocrats, or as sulky as babies; the
point is that the feeling was personal. But Larkin, like
Danton, not only talks like ten thousand men talking, but he
also has some of the carelessness of the colossus of Arcis;
"Que mon nom soit fletri, que la France soit libra."

## A Dance of Degradation

It is needless to say that this respecting of persons has
led all the other parties a dance of degradation. We ruin
South Africa because it would be a slight on Lord Gladstone
to save South Africa. We have a bad army. because it would
be a snub to Lord Haldane to have a good army. And no Tory
is allowed to say "Marconi" for fear Mr. George should say
"Kynoch." But this curious personal element, with its
appalling lack of patriotism, has appeared in a new and
curious form in another department of life; the department
of literature, especially periodical literature. And the
form it takes is the next example I shall give of the way in
which the capitalists are now appearing, more and more
openly, as the masters and princes of the community.

I will take a Victorian instance to mark the change; as I
did in the case of the advertisement of "Bubbles." It was
said in my childhood, by the more apoplectic and elderly
sort of Tory, that W. E. Gladstone was only a Free Trader
because he had a partnership in Gilbey's foreign wines. This
was, no doubt, nonsense; but it had a dim symbolic, or
mainly prophetic, truth in it. It was true, to some extent
even then, and it has been increasingly true since, that the
statesman was often an ally of the salesman; and represented
not only a nation of shopkeepers, but one particular shop.
But in Gladstone's time, even if this was true, it was never
the whole truth; and no one would have endured it being the
admitted truth. The politician was not solely an eloquent
and persuasive bagman travelling for certain business men;
he was bound to mix even his corruption with some
intelligible ideals and rules of policy. And the proof of it
is this: that at least it was the statesman who bulked large
in the public eye; and his financial backer was entirely in
the background. Old gentlemen might choke over their port,
with the moral certainty that the Prime Minister had shares
in a wine merchant's. But the old gentleman would have died
on the spot if the wine merchant had really been made as
important as the Prime Minister. If it had been Sir Walter
Gilbey whom Disraeli denounced, or Punch caricatured; if Sir
Walter Gilbey's favourite collars (with the design of which
I am unacquainted) had grown as large as the wings of an
archangel; if Sir Walter Gilbey had been credited with
successfully eliminating the British Oak with his little
hatchet; if, near the Temple and the Courts of Justice, our
sight was struck by a majestic statue of a wine merchant; or
if the earnest Conservative lady who threw a gingerbread-nut
at the Premier had directed it towards the wine merchant
instead, the shock to Victorian England would have been very
great indeed.

## Haloes for Employers

Now something very like that is happening; the mere wealthy
employer is beginning to have not only the power but some of
the glory. I have seen in several magazines lately, and
magazines of a high class, the appearance of a new kind of
article. Literary men are being employed to praise a big
business man personally, as men used to praise a king. They
not only find political reasons for the commercial
schemes---that they have done for some time past---they also
find moral defences for the commercial schemers. They
describe the capitalist's brain of steel and heart of gold
in a way that Englishmen hitherto have been at least in the
habit of reserving for romantic figures like Garibaldi or
Gordon. In one excellent magazine Mr. T. P. O'Connor, who,
when he likes, can write on letters like a man of letters,
has some purple pages in praise of Sir Joseph Lyons---the
man who runs those tea-shop places. He incidentally brought
in a delightful passage about the beautiful souls possessed
by some people called Salmon and Gluckstein. I think I like
best the passage where he said that Lyons's charming social
accomplishments included a talent for "imitating a Jew." The
article is accompanied with a large and somewhat leering
portrait of that shopkeeper, which makes the parlour-trick
in question particularly astonishing. Another literary man,
who certainly ought to know better, wrote in another paper a
piece of hero-worship about Mr. Selfridge. No doubt the
fashion will spread, and the art of words, as polished and
pointed by Ruskin or Meredith, will be perfected yet further
to explore the labyrinthine heart of Harrod; or compare the
simple stoicism of Marshall with the saintly charm of
Snelgrove.

Any man can be praised---and rightly praised. If he only
stands on two legs he does something a cow cannot do. If a
rich man can manage to stand on two legs for a reasonable
time, it is called self-control. If he has only one leg, it
is called (with some truth) self-sacrifice. I could say
something nice (and true) about every man I have ever met.
Therefore, I do not doubt I could find something nice about
Lyons or Self ridge if I searched for it. But I shall not.
The nearest postman or cab-man will provide me with just the
same brain of steel and heart of gold as these unlucky lucky
men. But I do resent the whole age of patronage being
revived under such absurd patrons; and all poets becoming
court poets, under kings that have taken no oath, nor led us
into any battle.

# Unbusinesslike Business

The fairy tales we were all taught did not, like the history
we were all taught, consist entirely of lies. Parts of the
tale of "Puss in Boots" or "Jack and the Beanstalk" may
strike the realistic eye as a little unlikely and out of the
common way, so to speak; but they contain some very solid
and very practical truths. For instance, it may be noted
that both in "Puss in Boots" and "Jack and the Beanstalk,"
if I remember aright, the ogre was not only an ogre but also
a magician. And it will generally be found that in all such
popular narratives, the king, if he is a wicked king, is
generally also a wizard. Now there is a very vital human
truth enshrined in this. Bad government, like good
government, is a spiritual thing. Even the tyrant never
rules by force alone; but mostly by fairy tales. And so it
is with the modern tyrant, the great employer. The sight of
a millionaire is seldom, in the ordinary sense, an
enchanting sight: nevertheless he is in his way an
enchanter. As they say in the gushing articles about him in
the magazines, he is a fascinating personality. So is a
snake. At least he is fascinating to rabbits; and so is the
millionaire to the rabbit-witted sort of people that ladies
and gentlemen have allowed themselves to become. He does, in
a manner, cast a spell, such as that which imprisoned
princes and princesses under the shapes of falcons or stags.
He has truly turned men into sheep, as Circe turned them
into swine.

Now, the chief of the fairy tales, by which he gains this
glory and glamour, is a certain hazy association he has
managed to create between the idea of bigness and the idea
of practicality. Numbers of the rabbit-witted ladies and
gentlemen do really think, in spite of themselves and their
experience, that so long as a shop has hundreds of different
doors and a great many hot and unhealthy underground
departments (they must be hot; this is very important), and
more people than would be needed for a man-of-war, or
crowded cathedral, to say: "This way, madam," and "The next
article, sir," it follows that the goods are good. In short,
they hold that the big businesses are businesslike. They are
not. Any housekeeper in a truthful mood, that is to say, any
housekeeper in a bad temper, will tell you that they are
not. But housekeepers, too, are human, and therefore
inconsistent and complex; and they do not always stick to
truth and bad temper. They are also affected by this queer
idolatry of the enormous and elaborate; and cannot help
feeling that anything so complicated must go like clockwork.
But complexity is no guarantee of accuracy---in clock-work
or in anything else. A clock can be as wrong as the human
head; and a clock can stop, as suddenly as the human heart.

But this strange poetry of plutocracy prevails over people
against their very senses. You write to one of the great
London stores or emporia, asking, let us say, for an
umbrella. A month or two afterwards you receive a very
elaborately constructed parcel, containing a broken parasol.
You are very pleased. You are gratified to reflect on what a
vast number of assistants and employees had combined to
break that parasol. You luxuriate in the memory of all those
long rooms and departments and wonder in which of them the
parasol that you never ordered was broken. Or you want a toy
elephant for your child on Christmas Day; as children, like
all nice and healthy people, are very ritualistic. Some week
or so after Twelfth Night, let us say, you have the pleasure
of removing three layers of pasteboards, five layers of
brown paper, and fifteen layers of tissue paper and
discovering the fragments of an artificial crocodile. You
smile in an expansive spirit. You feel that your soul has
been broadened by the vision of incompetence conducted on so
large a scale. You admire all the more the colossal and
Omnipresent Brain of the Organiser of Industry, who amid all
his multitudinous cares did not disdain to remember his duty
of smashing even the smallest toy of the smallest child. Or,
supposing you have asked him to send you some two rolls of
cocoa-nut matting: and supposing (after a due interval for
reflection) he duly delivers to you the five rolls of wire
netting. You take pleasure in the consideration of a
mystery: which coarse minds might have called a mistake. It
consoles you to know how big the business is: and what an
enormous number of people were needed to make such a
mistake.

That is the romance that has been told about the big shops;
in the literature and art which they have bought, and which
(as I said in my recent articles) will soon be quite
indistinguishable from their ordinary advertisements. The
literature is commercial; and it is only fair to say that
the commerce is often really literary. It is no romance, but
only rubbish.

The big commercial concerns of to-day are quite
exceptionally incompetent. They will be even more
incompetent when they are omnipotent. Indeed, that is, and
always has been, the whole point of a monopoly; the old and
sound argument against a monopoly. It is only because it is
incompetent that it has to be omnipotent. When one large
shop occupies the whole of one side of a street (or
sometimes both sides), it does so in order that men may be
unable to get what they want; and may be forced to buy what
they don't want. That the rapidly approaching kingdom of the
Capitalists will ruin art and letters, I have already said.
I say here that in the only sense that can be called human,
it will ruin trade, too.

I will not let Christmas go by, even when writing for a
revolutionary paper necessarily appealing to many with none
of my religious sympathies, without appealing to those
sympathies. I knew a man who sent to a great rich shop for a
figure for a group of Bethlehem. It arrived broken. I think
that is exactly all that business men have now the sense to
do.

# The War on Holidays

The general proposition, not always easy to define
exhaustively, that the reign of the capitalist will be the
reign of the cad---that is, of the unlicked type that is
neither the citizen nor the gentleman---can be excellently
studied in its attitude towards holidays. The special
emblematic Employer of to-day, especially the Model Employer
(who is the worst sort) has in his starved and evil heart a
sincere hatred of holidays. I do not mean that he
necessarily wants all his workmen to work until they drop;
that only occurs when he happens to be stupid as well as
wicked. I do not mean to say that he is necessarily
unwilling to grant what he would call "decent hours of
labour." He may treat men like dirt; but if you want to make
money, even out of dirt, you must let it lie fallow by some
rotation of rest. He may treat men as dogs, but unless he is
a lunatic he will for certain periods let sleeping dogs lie.

But humane and reasonable hours for labour have nothing
whatever to do with the idea of holidays. It is not even a
question of ten-hours day and eight-hours day; it is not a
question of cutting down leisure to the space necessary for
food, sleep and exercise. If the modern employer came to the
conclusion, for some reason or other, that he could get most
out of his men by working them hard for only two hours a
day, his whole mental attitude would still be foreign and
hostile to holidays. For his whole mental attitude is that
the passive time and the active time are alike useful for
him and his business. All is, indeed, grist that comes to
his mill, including the millers. His slaves' still serve him
in unconsciousness, as dogs still hunt in slumber. His grist
is ground not only by the sounding wheels of iron, but by
the soundless wheel of blood and brain. His sacks are still
filling silently when the doors are shut on the streets and
the sound of the grinding is low.

## The Great Holiday

Now a holiday has no connection with using a man either by
beating or feeding him. When you give a man a holiday you
give him back his body and soul. It is quite possible you
may be doing him an injury (though he seldom thinks so), but
that does not affect the question for those to whom a
holiday is holy. Immortality is the great holiday; and a
holiday, like the immortality in the old theologies, is a
double-edged privilege. But wherever it is genuine it is
simply the restoration and completion of the man. If people
ever looked at the printed word under their eye, the word
"recreation" would be like the word "resurrection," the
blast of a trumpet.

A man, being merely useful, is necessarily incomplete,
especially if he be a modern man and means by being useful
being "utilitarian." A man going into a modern club gives up
his hat; a man going into a modern factory gives up his
head. He then goes in and works loyally for the old firm to
build up the great fabric of commerce (which can be done
without a head), but when he has done work he goes to the
cloak-room, like the man at the club, and gets his head back
again; that is the germ of the holiday. It may be urged that
the club man who leaves his hat often goes away with another
hat; and perhaps it may be the same with the factory hand
who has left his head. A hand that has lost its head may
affect the fastidious as a mixed metaphor; but, God pardon
us all, what an unmixed truth! We could almost prove the
whole case from the habit of calling human beings merely
"hands" while they are working; as if the hand were horribly
cut off, like the hand that has offended; as if, while the
sinner entered heaven maimed, his unhappy hand still
laboured laying up riches for the lords of hell. But to
return to the man whom we found waiting for his head in the
cloak-room. It may be urged, we say, that he might take the
wrong head, like the wrong hat; but here the similarity
ceases. For it has been observed by benevolent onlookers at
life's drama that the hat taken away by mistake is
frequently better than the real hat; whereas the head taken
away after the hours of toil is certainly worse: stained
with the cobwebs and dust of this dustbin of all the
centuries.

## The Supreme Adventure

All the words dedicated to places of eating and drinking are
pure and poetic words. Even the word "hotel" is the word
hospital. And St. Julien, whose claret I drank this
Christmas, was the patron saint of innkeepers, because (as
far as I can make out) he was hospitable to lepers. Now I do
not say that the ordinary hotel-keeper in Piccadilly or the
Avenue de l'Opera would embrace a leper, slap him on the
back, and ask him to order what he liked; but I do say that
hospitality is his trade virtue. And I do also say it is
well to keep before our eyes the supreme adventure of a
virtue. If you are brave, think of the man who was braver
than you. If you are kind, think of the man who was kinder
than you.

That is what was meant by having a patron saint. That is the
link between the poor saint who received bodily lepers and
the great hotel proprietor who (as a rule) receives
spiritual lepers. But a word yet weaker than "hotel"
illustrates the same point---the word "restaurant." There
again you have the admission that there is a definite
building or statue to "restore"; that ineffaceable image of
man that some call the image of God. And that is the
holiday; it is the restaurant or restoring thing that, by a
blast of magic, turns a man into himself.

This complete and reconstructed man is the nightmare of the
modern capitalist. His whole scheme would crack across like
a mirror of Shallot, if once a plain man were ready for his
two plain duties---ready to live and ready to die. And that
horror of holidays which marks the modern capitalist is very
largely a horror of the vision of a whole human being:
something that is not a "hand" or a "head for figures." But
an awful creature who has met himself in the wilderness. The
employers will give time to eat, time to sleep; they are in
terror of a time to think.

To anyone who knows any history it is wholly needless to say
that holidays have been destroyed. As Mr. Belloc, who knows
much more history than you or I, recently pointed out in the
"Pall Mall Magazine," Shakespeare's title of "Twelfth Night:
or What You Will" simply meant that a winter carnival for
everybody went on wildly till the twelfth night after
Christmas. Those of my readers who work for modern offices
or factories might ask their employers for twelve days'
holidays after Christmas. And they might let me know the
reply.

# The Church of the Servile State

I confess I cannot see why mere blasphemy by itself should
be an excuse for tyranny and treason; or how the mere
isolated fact of a man not believing in God should be a
reason for my believing in Him.

But the rather spinsterish flutter among some of the old
Freethinkers has put one tiny ripple of truth in it; and
that affects the idea which I wish to emphasise even to
monotony in these pages. I mean the idea that the new
community which the capitalists are now constructing will be
a very complete and absolute community; and one which will
tolerate nothing really independent of itself. Now, it is
true that any positive creed, true or false, would tend to
be independent of itself. It might be Roman Catholicism or
Islam or Materialism; but, if strongly held, it would be a
thorn in the side of the Servile State. The Muslim thinks
all men immortal: the Materialist thinks all men mortal. But
the Muslim does not think the rich Sinbad will live forever;
but the poor Sinbad will die on his deathbed. The
Materialist does not think that Mr. Haeckel will go to
heaven, while all the peasants will go to pot, like their
chickens. In every serious doctrine of the destiny of men,
there is some trace of the doctrine of the equality of men.
But the capitalist really depends on some religion of
inequality. The capitalist must somehow distinguish himself
from human kind; he must be obviously above it---or he would
be obviously below it. Take even the least attractive and
popular side of the larger religions to-day; take the mere
vetoes imposed by Islam on Atheism or Catholicism. The
Muslim veto upon intoxicants cuts across all classes. But it
is absolutely necessary for the capitalist (who presides at
a Licensing Committee, and also at a large dinner), it is
absolutely necessary for *him*, to make a distinction
between gin and champagne. The Atheist veto upon all
miracles cuts across all classes. But it is absolutely
necessary for the capitalist to make a distinction between
his wife (who is an aristocrat and consults crystal gazers
and star gazers in the West End), and vulgar miracles
claimed by gipsies or travelling showmen. The Catholic veto
upon usury, as defined in dogmatic councils, cuts across all
classes. But it is absolutely necessary to the capitalist to
distinguish more delicately between two kinds of usury; the
kind he finds useful and the kind he does not find useful.
The religion of the Servile State must have no dogmas or
definitions. It cannot afford to have any definitions. For
definitions are very dreadful things: they do the two things
that most men, especially comfortable men, cannot endure.
They fight; and they fight fair.

Every religion, apart from open devil worship, must appeal
to a virtue or the pretence of a virtue. But a virtue,
generally speaking, does some good to everybody. It is
therefore necessary to distinguish among the people it was
meant to benefit those whom it does benefit. Modern
broad-mindedness benefits the rich; and benefits nobody
else. It was meant to benefit the rich; and meant to benefit
no-body else. And if you think this unwarranted, I will put
before you one plain question. There are some pleasures of
the poor that may also mean profits for the rich: there are
other pleasures of the poor which cannot mean profits for
the rich? Watch this one contrast, and you will watch the
whole creation of a careful slavery.

In the last resort the two things called Beer and Soap end
only in a froth. They are both below the high notice of a
real religion. But there is just this difference: that the
soap makes the factory more satisfactory, while the beer
only makes the workman more satisfied. Wait and see if the
Soap does not increase and the Beer decrease. Wait and see
whether the religion of the Servile State is not in every
case what I say: the encouragement of small virtues
supporting capitalism, the discouragement of the huge
virtues that defy it. Many great religions, Pagan and
Christian, have insisted on wine. Only one, I think, has
insisted on Soap. You will find it in the New Testament
attributed to the Pharisees.

# Science and the Eugenists

The key fact in the new development of plutocracy is that it
will use its own blunder as an excuse for further crimes.
Everywhere the very completeness of the impoverishment will
be made a reason for the enslavement; though the men who
impoverished were the same who enslaved. It is as if a
highwayman not only took away a gentleman's horse and all
his money, but then handed him over to the police for
tramping without visible means of subsistence. And the most
monstrous feature in this enormous meanness may be noted in
the plutocratic appeal to science, or, rather, to the
pseudo-science that they call Eugenics.

The Eugenists get the ear of the humane but rather hazy
cliques by saying that the present "conditions" under which
people work and breed are bad for the race; but the modern
mind will not generally stretch beyond one step of
reasoning, and the consequence which appears to follow on
the consideration of these "conditions" is by no means what
would originally have been expected. If somebody says: "A
rickety cradle may mean a rickety baby," the natural
deduction, one would think, would be to give the people a
good cradle, or give them money enough to buy one. But that
means higher wages and greater equalisation of wealth; and
the plutocratic scientist, with a slightly troubled
expression, turns his eyes and pince-nez in another
direction. Reduced to brutal terms of truth, his difficulty
is this and simply this: More food, leisure, and money for
the workman would mean a better workman, better even from
the point of view of anyone for whom he worked. But more
food, leisure, and money would also mean a more independent
workman. A house with a decent fire and a full pantry would
be a better house to make a chair or mend a clock in, even
from the customer's point of view, than a hovel with a leaky
roof and a cold hearth. But a house with a decent fire and a
full pantry would also be a better house in which to
*refuse* to make a chair or mend a clock---a much better
house to do nothing in---and doing nothing is sometimes one
of the highest of the duties of man. All but the
hard-hearted must be torn with pity for this pathetic
dilemma of the rich man, who has to keep the poor man just
stout enough to do the work and just thin enough to have to
do it. As he stood gazing at the leaky roof and the rickety
cradle in a pensive manner, there one day came into his mind
a new and curious idea---one of the most strange, simple,
and horrible ideas that have ever risen from the deep pit of
original sin.

The roof could not be mended, or, at least, it could not be
mended much, without upsetting the capitalist balance, or,
rather, disproportion in society; for a man with a roof is a
man with a house, and to that extent his house is his
castle. The cradle could not be made to rock easier, or, at
least, not much easier, without strengthening the hands of
the poor household, for the hand that rocks the cradle rules
the world---to that extent. But it occurred to the
capitalist that there was one sort of furniture in the house
that could be altered. The husband and wife could be
altered. Birth costs nothing, except in pain and valour and
such old-fashioned things; and the merchant need pay no more
for mating a strong miner to a healthy fishwife than he pays
when the miner mates himself with a less robust female whom
he has the sentimentality to prefer. Thus it might be
possible, by keeping on certain broad lines of heredity, to
have some physical improvement without any moral, political,
or social improvement. It might be possible to keep a supply
of strong and healthy slaves without coddling them with
decent conditions. As the mill-owners use the wind and the
water to drive their mills, they would use this natural
force as something even cheaper; and turn their wheels by
diverting from its channel the blood of a man in his youth.
That is what Eugenics means; and that is all that it means.

Of the moral state of those who think of such things it does
not become us to speak. The practical question is rather the
intellectual one: of whether their calculations are well
founded, and whether the men of science can or will
guarantee them any such physical certainties. Fortunately,
it becomes clearer every day that they are, scientifically
speaking, building on the shifting sand. The theory of
breeding slaves breaks down through what a democrat calls
the equality of men, but which even an oligarchist will find
himself forced to call the similarity of men. That is, that
though it is not true that all men are normal, it is
overwhelmingly certain that most men are normal. All the
common Eugenic arguments are drawn from extreme cases,
which, even if human honour and laughter allowed of their
being eliminated, would not by their elimination greatly
affect the mass. For the rest, there remains the enormous
weakness in Eugenics, that if ordinary men's judgment or
liberty is to be discounted in relation to heredity, the
judgment of the judges must be discounted in relation to
their heredity. The Eugenic professor may or may not succeed
in choosing a baby's parents; it is quite certain that he
cannot succeed in choosing his own parents. All his
thoughts, including his Eugenic thoughts, are, by the very
principle of those thoughts, flowing from a doubtful or
tainted source. In short, we should need a perfectly Wise
Man to do the thing at all. And if he were a Wise Man he
would not do it.

# The Evolution of the Prison

I have never understood why it is that those who talk most
about evolution, and talk it in the very age of fashionable
evolutionism, do not see the one way in which evolution
really does apply to our modern difficulty. There is, of
course, an element of evolutionism in the universe; and I
know no religion or philosophy that ever entirely ignored
it. Evolution, popularly speaking, is that which happens to
unconscious things. They grow unconsciously; or fade
unconsciously; or rather, some parts of them grow and some
parts of them fade; and at any given moment there is almost
always some presence of the fading thing, and some
incompleteness in the growing one. Thus, if I went to sleep
for a hundred years, like the Sleeping Beauty (I wish I
could), I should grow a beard---unlike the Sleeping Beauty.
And just as I should grow hair if I were asleep, I should
grow grass if I were dead. Those whose religion it was that
God was asleep were perpetually impressed and affected by
the fact that he had a long beard. And those whose
philosophy it is that the universe is dead from the
beginning (being the grave of nobody in particular) think
that is the way that grass can grow. In any case, these
developments only occur with dead or dreaming things. What
happens when everyone is asleep is called Evolution. What
happens when everyone is awake is called Revolution.

There was once an honest man, whose name I never knew, but
whose face I can almost see (it is framed in Victorian
whiskers and fixed in a Victorian neck-cloth), who was
balancing the achievements of France and England in
civilisation and social efficiencies. And when he came to
the religious aspect he said that there were more stone and
brick churches used in France; but, on the other hand, there
are more sects in England. Whether such a lively
disintegration is a proof of vitality in any valuable sense
I have always doubted. The sun may breed maggots in a dead
dog; but it is essential for such a liberation of life that
the dog should be unconscious or (to say the least of it)
absent-minded. Broadly speaking, you may call the thing
corruption, if you happen to like dogs. You may call it
evolution, if you happen to like maggots. In either case, it
is what happens to things if you leave them alone.

## The Evolutionists' Error

Now, the modern Evolutionists have made no real use of the
idea of evolution, especially in the matter of social
prediction. They always fall into what is (from their
logical point of view) the error of supposing that evolution
knows what it is doing. They predict the State of the future
as a fruit rounded and polished. But the whole point of
evolution (the only point there is in it) is that no State
will ever be rounded and polished, because it will always
contain some organs that outlived their use, and some that
have not yet fully found theirs. If we wish to prophesy what
will happen, we must imagine things now moderate grown
enormous; things now local grown universal; things now
promising grown triumphant; primroses bigger than
sunflowers, and sparrows stalking about like flamingoes.

In other words, we must ask what modern institution has a
future before it? What modern institution may have swollen
to six times its present size in the social heat and growth
of the future? I do not think the Garden City will grow: but
of that I may speak in my next and last article of this
series. I do not think even the ordinary Elementary School,
with its compulsory education, will grow. Too many
unlettered people hate the teacher for teaching; and too
many lettered people hate the teacher for not teaching. The
Garden City will not bear much blossom; the young idea will
not shoot, unless it shoots the teacher. But the one
flowering tree on the estate, the one natural expansion
which I think will expand, is the institution we call the
Prison.

## Prisons for All

If the capitalists are allowed to erect their constructive
capitalist community, I speak quite seriously when I say
that I think Prison will become an almost universal
experience. It will not necessarily be a cruel or shameful
experience: on these points (I concede certainly for the
present purpose of debate) it may be a vastly improved
experience. The conditions in the prison, very possibly,
will be made more humane. But the prison will be made more
humane only in order to contain more of humanity. I think
little of the judgment and sense of humour of any man who
can have watched recent police trials without realising that
it is no longer a question of whether the law has been
broken by a crime; but, now, solely a question of whether
the situation could be mended by an imprisonment. It was so
with Tom Mann; it was so with Larkin; it was so with the
poor atheist who was kept in gaol for saying something he
had been acquitted of saying: it is so in such cases day by
day. We no longer lock a man up for doing something; we lock
him up in the hope of his doing nothing. Given this
principle, it is evidently possible to make the mere
conditions of punishment more moderate, or--(more probably)
more secret. There may really be more mercy in the Prison,
on condition that there is less justice in the Court. I
should not be surprised if, before we are done with all
this, a man was allowed to smoke in prison, on condition, of
course, that he had been put in prison for smoking.

Now that is the process which, in the absence of democratic
protest, will certainly proceed, will increase and multiply
and replenish the earth and subdue it. Prison may even lose
its disgrace for a little time; it will be difficult to make
it disgraceful when men like Larkin can be imprisoned for no
reason at all, just as his celebrated ancestor was hanged
for no reason at all. But capitalist society, which
naturally does not know the meaning of honour, cannot know
the meaning of disgrace: and it will still go on imprisoning
for no reason at all. Or rather for that rather simple
reason that makes a cat spring or a rat run away.

It matters little whether our masters stoop to state the
matter in the form that every prison should be a school; or
in the more candid form that every school should be a
prison. They have already fulfilled their servile principle
in the case of the schools. Everyone goes to the Elementary
Schools except the few people who tell them to go there. I
prophesy that (unless our revolt succeeds) nearly everyone
will be going to Prison, with a precisely similar patience.

# The Lash for Labour

If I were to prophesy that two hundred years hence a grocer
would have the right and habit of beating the grocer's
assistant with a stick, or that shop girls might be flogged,
as they already can be fined, many would regard it as rather
a rash remark. It would be a rash remark. Prophecy is always
unreliable; unless we except the kind which is avowedly
irrational, mystical and supernatural prophecy. But
relatively to nearly all the other prophecies that are being
made around me to-day, I should say my prediction stood an
exceptionally good chance. In short, I think the grocer with
the stick is a figure we are far more likely to see than the
Superman or the Samurai, or the True Model Employer, or the
Perfect Fabian Official, or the citizen of the Collectivist
State. And it is best for us to see the full ugliness of the
transformation which is passing over our Society in some
such abrupt and even grotesque image at the end of it. The
beginnings of a decline, in every age of history, have
always had the appearance of being reforms. Nero not only
fiddled while Rome was burning, but he probably really paid
more attention to the fiddle than to the fire. The Roi
Soleil, like many other *soleils*, was most splendid to all
appearance a little before sunset. And if I ask myself what
will be the ultimate and final fruit of all our social
reforms, garden cities, model employers, insurances,
exchanges, arbitration courts, and so on, then, I say, quite
seriously, "I think it will be labour under the lash."

## The Sultan and the Sack

Let us arrange in some order a number of converging
considerations that all point in this direction. (1) It is
broadly true, no doubt, that the weapon of the employer has
hitherto been the threat of dismissal, that is, the threat
of enforced starvation. He is a Sultan who need not order
the bastinado, so long as he can order the sack. But there
are not a few signs that this weapon is not quite so
convenient and flexible a one as his increasing rapacities
require. The fact of the introduction of fines, secretly or
openly, in many shops and factories, proves that it is
convenient for the capitalists to have some temporary and
adjustable form of punishment besides the final punishment
of pure ruin. Nor is it difficult to see the common-sense of
this from their wholly inhuman point of view. The act of
sacking a man is attended with the same disadvantages as the
act of shooting a man: one of which is that you can get no
more out of him. It is, I am told, distinctly annoying to
blow a fellow creature's brains out with a revolver and then
suddenly remember that he was the only person who knew where
to get the best Russian cigarettes. So our Sultan, who is
the orderer of the sack, is also the bearer of the
bow-string. A school in which there was no punishment,
except expulsion, would be a school in which it would be
very difficult to keep proper discipline; and the sort of
discipline on which the reformed capitalism will insist will
be all of the type which in free nations is imposed only on
children. Such a school would probably be in a chronic
condition of breaking up for the holidays. And the reasons
for the insufficiency of this extreme instrument are also
varied and evident. The materialistic Sociologists, who talk
about the survival of the fittest and the weakest going to
the wall (and whose way of looking at the world is to put on
the latest and most powerful scientific spectacles, and then
shut their eyes), frequently talk as if a workman were
simply efficient or non-efficient, as if a criminal were
reclaimable or irreclaimable. The employers have sense
enough at least to know better than that. They can see that
a servant may be useful in one way and exasperating in
another; that he may be bad in one part of his work and good
in another; that he may be occasionally drunk and yet
generally indispensable. Just as a practical school-master
would know that a schoolboy can be at once the plague and
the pride of the school. Under these circumstances small and
varying penalties are obviously the most convenient things
for the person keeping order; an underling can be punished
for coming late, and yet do useful work when he comes. It
will be possible to give a rap over the knuckles without
wholly cutting off the right hand that has offended. Under
these circumstances the employers have naturally resorted to
fines. But there is a further ground for believing that the
process will go beyond fines before it is completed.

\(2\) The fine is based on the old European idea that
everybody possesses private property in some reasonable
degree; but not only is this not true to-day, but it is not
being made any truer, even by those who honestly believe
that they are mending matters. The great employers will
often do something towards improving what they call the
"conditions" of their workers; but a worker might have his
conditions as carefully arranged as a racehorse has, and
still have no more personal property than a racehorse. If
you take an average poor seamstress or factory girl, you
will find that the power of chastising her through her
property has very considerable limits; it is almost as hard
for the employer of labour to tax her for punishment as it
is for the Chancellor of the Exchequer to tax her for
revenue. The next most obvious thing to think of, of course,
would be imprisonment, and that might be effective enough
under simpler conditions. An old-fashioned shop-keeper might
have locked up his apprentice in his coal-cellar; but his
coal-cellar would be a real, pitch dark coal-cellar, and the
rest of his house would be a real human house. Everybody
(especially the apprentice) would see a most perceptible
difference between the two. But, as I pointed out in the
article before this, the whole tendency of the capitalist
legislation and experiment is to make imprisonment much more
general and automatic, while making it, or professing to
make it, more humane. In other words, the hygienic prison
and the servile factory will become so uncommonly like each
other that the poor man will hardly know or care whether he
is at the moment expiating an offence or merely swelling a
dividend. In both places there will be the same sort of
shiny tiles. In neither place will there be any cell so
unwholesome as a coal-cellar or so wholesome as a home. The
weapon of the prison, therefore, like the weapon of the
fine, will be found to have considerable limitations to its
effectiveness when employed against the wretched reduced
citizen of our day. Whether it be property or liberty you
cannot take from him what he has not got. You cannot
imprison a slave, because you cannot enslave a slave.

## The Barbarous Revival

\(3\) Most people, on hearing the suggestion that it may
come to corporal punishment at last (as it did in every
slave system I ever heard of, including some that were
generally kindly, and even successful), will merely be
struck with horror and incredulity, and feel that such a
barbarous revival is unthinkable in the modern atmosphere.
How far it will be, or need be, a revival of the actual
images and methods of ruder times I will discuss in a
moment. But first, as another of the converging lines
tending to corporal punishment, consider this: that for some
reason or other the old full-blooded and masculine
humanitarianism in this matter has weakened and fallen
silent; it has weakened and fallen silent in a very curious
manner, the precise reason for which I do not altogether
understand. I knew the average Liberal, the average
Nonconformist minister, the average Labour Member, the
average middle-class Socialist, were, with all their good
qualities, very deficient in what I consider a respect for
the human soul. But I did imagine that they had the ordinary
modern respect for the human body. The fact, however, is
clear and incontrovertible. In spite of the horror of all
humane people, in spite of the hesitation even of our
corrupt and panic-stricken Parliament, measures can now be
triumphantly passed for spreading or increasing the use of
physical torture, and for applying it to the newest and
vaguest categories of crime. Thirty or forty years ago, nay,
twenty years ago, when Mr. F. Hugh O'Donnell and others
forced a Liberal Government to drop the cat-'o-nine-tails
like a scorpion, we could have counted on a mass of honest
hatred of such things. We cannot count on it now.

\(4\) But lastly, it is not necessary that in the factories
of the future the institution of physical punishment should
actually *remind* people of the jambok or the knout. It
could easily be developed out of the many forms of physical
discipline which are already used by employers on the
excuses of education or hygiene. Already in some factories
girls are obliged to swim whether they like it or not, or do
gymnastics whether they like it or not. By a simple
extension of hours or complication of exercises a pair of
Swedish clubs could easily be so used as to leave their
victim as exhausted as one who had come off the rack. I
think it extremely likely that they will be.

# The Mask of Socialism

The chief aim of all honest Socialists just now is to
prevent the coming of Socialism. I do not say it as a sneer,
but, on the contrary, as a compliment; a compliment to their
political instinct and public spirit. I admit it may be
called an exaggeration; but there really is a sort of sham
Socialism that the modern politicians may quite possibly
agree to set up; if they do succeed in setting it up, the
battle for the poor is lost.

We must note, first of all, a general truth about the
curious time we live in. It will not be so difficult as some
people may suppose to make the Servile State *look* rather
like Socialism, especially to the more pedantic kind of
Socialist. The reason is this. The old lucid and trenchant
expounder of Socialism, such as Blatchford or Fred
Henderson, always describes the economic power of the
plutocrats as consisting in private property. Of course, in
a sense, this is quite true; though they too often miss the
point that private property, as such, is not the same as
property confined to the few. But the truth is that the
situation has grown much more subtle; perhaps too subtle,
not to say too insane, for straight-thinking theorists like
Blatchford. The rich man to-day does not only rule by using
private property; he also rules by treating public property
as if it were private property. A man like Lord Murray
pulled the strings, especially the purse-strings; but the
whole point of his position was that all sorts of strings
had got entangled. The secret strength of the money he held
did not lie merely in the fact that it was his money. It lay
precisely in the fact that nobody had any clear idea of
whether it was his money, or his successor's money, or his
brother's money, or the Marconi Company's money, or the
Liberal Party's money, or the English Nation's money. It was
buried treasure; but it was not private property. It was the
acme of plutocracy because it was not private property. Now,
by following this precedent, this unprincipled vagueness
about official and unofficial moneys by the cheerful habit
of always mixing up the money in the pocket with the money
in the till, it would be quite possible to keep the rich as
rich as ever in practice, though they might have suffered
confiscation in theory. Mr. Lloyd George has four hundred a
year as an M. P.; but he not only gets much more as a
Minister, but he might at any time get immeasurably more by
speculating on State secrets that are necessarily known to
him. Some say that he has even attempted something of the
kind. Now, it would be quite possible to cut Mr. George
down, not to four hundred a year, but to fourpence a day;
and still leave him all these other and enormous financial
superiorities. It must be remembered that a Socialist State,
in any way resembling a modern State, must, however
egalitarian it may be, have the handling of huge sums, and
the enjoyment of large conveniences; it is not improbable
that the same men will handle and enjoy in much the same
manner, though in theory they are doing it as instruments,
and not as individuals. For instance, the Prime Minister has
a private house, which is also (I grieve to inform that
eminent Puritan) a public house. It is supposed to be a sort
of Government office; though people do not generally give
children's parties, or go to bed in a Government office. I
do not know where Mr. Herbert Samuel lives; but I have no
doubt he does himself well in the matter of decoration and
furniture. On the existing official parallel there is no
need to move any of these things in order to Socialise them.
There is no need to withdraw one diamond-headed nail from
the carpet; or one golden teaspoon from the tray. It is only
necessary to call it an official residence, like 10
Downing-street. I think it is not at all improbable that
this Plutocracy, pretending to be a Bureaucracy, will be
attempted or achieved. Our wealthy rulers will be in the
position which grumblers in the world of sport sometimes
attribute to some of the "gentlemen" players. They assert
that some of these are paid like any professional; only
their pay is called their expenses. This system might run
side by side with a theory of equal wages, as absolute as
that once laid down by Mr. Bernard Shaw. By the theory of
the State, Mr. Herbert Samuel and Mr. Lloyd George might be
humble citizens, drudging for their four-pence a day; and no
better off than porters and coal-heavers. If there were
presented to our mere senses what appeared to be the form of
Mr. Herbert Samuel in an astrakhan coat and a motor-car, we
should find the record of the expenditure (if we could find
it at all) under the heading of "Speed Limit Extension
Enquiry Commission." If it fell to our lot to behold (with
the eye of flesh) what seemed to be Mr. Lloyd George lying
in a hammock and smoking a costly cigar, we should know that
the expenditure would be divided between the "Condition of
Rope and Netting Investigation Department," and the "State
of Cuban Tobacco Trade: Imperial Inspector's Report." Such
is the society I think they will build unless we can knock
it down as fast as they build it. Everything in it,
tolerable or intolerable, will have but one use; and that
use what our ancestors used to call usance or usury. Its art
may be good or bad, but it will be an advertisement for
usurers; its literature may be good or bad, but it will
appeal to the patronage of usurers; its scientific selection
will select according to the needs of usurers; its religion
will be just charitable enough to pardon usurers; its penal
system will be just cruel enough to crush all the critics of
usurers: the truth of it will be Slavery: and the title of
it may quite possibly be Socialism.
