One thousand eight hundred and eighty years ago a new law was revealed
to men by Jesus Christ. By His life and His death Christ showed to men
what he who wants to be His disciple, a Christian, may do, and what not.

According to Christ's teaching, the sons of the Father are free (Matthew
17:26), for they know the truth, and the truth shall make them free
(John 8:32). Christ's teaching was then, even as it is now, contrary to
the teaching of the world. According to the teaching of the world, the
powers govern the nations, and, to govern them, compel some people to
kill, execute, punish others, and to swear that they will in everything
do the will of the rulers. According to Christ's teaching, a man not
only cannot kill another, but even cannot do violence to him, or resist
him with force: he can not do evil to his neighbour, nor even to his
enemy.

The teaching of the world and of Christ have always been and always will
be opposed to each other. Christ knew this, and said this to His
disciples, and predicted to them that He Himself would suffer and that
they, too, would be delivered to be afflicted and killed (Matthew 24:9),
and that the world would hate them, because they would not be the
servants of the world, but of the Father (John 15:19,20).

And everything came to pass as Jesus had predicted. The world hated Him
and tried to ruin Him. All, the Pharisees, and the Sadducees, and the
scribes, and the Herodians, rebuked Him for being an enemy to Caesar,
for prohibiting men from paying tribute to him, for disturbing and
corrupting the world. They said that He was an evildoer, that He made
Himself a king, and so was an enemy of Caesar (John 19:12).

Even before He was delivered up to be put to death, they, watching Him,
sent cunning men up to Him, to catch Him in some utterance, so as to
dehver Him up to the authorities and the power of the ruler. And they
asked Him:

Master, we know that Thou art true, and teachest the way of God in
truth, neither carest Thou for any man: for Thou regardest not the
person of men. Tell us therefore, What thinkest Thou? Is it lawful to
give tribute unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceived their wickedness,
and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? Shew me the tribute money. And
they brought unto Him a penny. And He saith unto them. Whose is this
image and superscription? They say unto Him, Csesar's. Then saith He
unto them, Eender therefore unto Csesar the things which are Csesar's;
and unto God the things that are God's. When they had heard these words,
they marvelled at His answer, and grew silent.

They had expected Him to say, either that it is lawful and necessary to
pay tribute to Csesar, and that thus He would destroy His whole teaching
about the sons being free, about a man being obliged to hve Hke the
birds of the air, not caring for the morrow, and many similar things; or
that He would say that it is not lawful to pay tribute to Csesar, and
that thus He would show Himself to be an enemy to Caesar. But Christ
said. Unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things
which are God's. He said more than they had expected of Him. He defined
everything, dividing everything a man has into two parts,---into the
human and the divine, and said that what is man's may be given to man,
and what is God's cannot be given to man, but only to God; and what both
God and Csesar claim ought to be given to God.

With these words He told them that if a man believes in the law of God,
he can fulfil Ccesar's law only when it is not contrary to God's. For
the Pharisees, who did not know the truth, there still existed a law of
God which they would not have transgressed, even if Caesar's law
demanded it of them. They would not have departed from circumcision,
from the observance of the Sabbath, from fasting and from many other
things. If Caesar had demanded of them work on a Sabbath, they would
have said: "To Caesar belong all days, but not the Sabbath." The same is
true of circumcision and of other things.

Christ showed them with His answer that God's law stood higher than
Caesar's, and that a man can give to Caesar only what is not contrary to
God's law.

Now, what is for Christ and for His disciples Caesar's, and what God's?

One is horrified to think of the answer to this question, which one may
hear from Christians of our time! God's, in the opinion of our
Christians, never interferes with Caesar's, and Caesar's is always in
agreement with God's. The whole life is given up to the service of
Caesar, and only what does not interfere with Caesar is turned over to
God. Not so did Christ understand it.

For Christ the whole life is God's business, and what is not God's may
be given to Caesar.

"Unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things
which are God's."

What is Caesar's? The coin,---what is carnal,---not yours.

Give, then, everything carnal to him who will take it; but your Life,
which you have received from God, is all God's. This cannot be given to
any one but God, because man's life, according to Christ's teaching, is
the service of God (Matthew 4:10), and one cannot serve two masters
(Matthew 6:24).

Everything carnal a man must give to somebody, and so may give also to
Caesar; but he cannot serve anybody but God.

If men believed in Christ's teaching, in the teaching of love, they
could not lose all the divine laws revealed by Christ, in order to
fulfil the laws of Caesar.

*1887.*
